Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Stephen Hutcheson,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                                  THE
                            Alden Catalogue
                                   OF
                             CHOICE BOOKS.


                             May 30, 1889.
                   _Superseding all previous dates._


                     WATCH-WORDS of the REVOLUTION:

Give the best book for the least money possible.

1,000,000 books, profit 1 cent each--$10,000, but 1,000 books, profit
  $1.00 each--$1,000 only.

Publish books, only, that DESERVE to sell--merit wins in the end.

To make $1.00 and a friend is better than $5.00 profit.

"Push things" and "Fight it out on this line."--U. S. Grant.


                     TERMS, FREIGHT, POSTAGE, ETC.

Prices Include cost of prepaying transportation by mail or express,
unless "at store" is specified. Formerly, prices were at store, always,
cost of transportation being added. The change is one of convenience
rather than of increase or of decrease, but on many books there is a
substantial reduction in price.

Stockholders or Bondholders of the Alden Publishing Co. are allowed a
_reduction_ from Catalogue prices of the amount indicated by the figures
in parenthesis; for instance: Alden's Manifold Cyclopedia, per volume,
cloth 60c. (20c.) means 40 cents net to Stockholders. To avoid possible
misunderstanding, orders at _Stockholders' prices must invariably_ be
accompanied by remittance, and by _Coupon_ or a _Certificate_ which is
supplied to Stockholders for that purpose. Terms for Stock will be found
elsewhere under the head of "Co-operative Publishing;" terms for Bonds
will be seen by copy of the Bond itself elsewhere printed.


                       John B. Alden, Publisher,
                 THE ALDEN PUBLISHING CO., Proprietors.
              NEW YORK, 393 Pearl Street. P. O. Box 1227.

_CHICAGO_, 242 Wabash Avenue.

_PHILADELPHIA_, 13 South 9th Street.

_ATLANTA_, 6 Whitehall Street.

_TORONTO_, 30 Adelaide Street, East.




                        Co-operative Publishing.


The Alden Publishing Co. was organized June 1888 with a view, on the
part of its promoters, to consolidating and strengthening various
interests which had previously been allied, but independent, and of
introducing to the fullest practicable extent the principle of
_co-operation_ for the _benefit of buyers_ of books. The amount of
capital paid up Feb. 4, 1889, was $61,167.00. A dividend of _five per
cent._ was paid Dec. 20, 1888. The business is recently growing very
rapidly, and the prospects are extremely encouraging.


                        The Alden Publishing Co.

The Company was incorporated June, 1888; authorized capital $500,000:
shares $1.00 each. The capital stock of the Company is sold at par for
cash, in lots of not less than five shares, and is _NOT_ assessible, and
there is absolutely no liability to stockholders whose shares are fully
paid for, under any circumstances, other than the liability for salaries
of employes, which is common to, we believe, all of the States, and is
practically no liability, salaries being paid weekly or fortnightly.

_All dividends_ will be paid _in cash_, but each Stockholder will be
allowed the privilege of taking instead of cash any books sold by the
Company to the amount of the dividend, at special reduced prices to
stockholders, which makes the dividend _equivalent to about 16 per
cent_. _Prices to Stockholders_ are the regular prices _reduced_ by the
amount indicated by the figures in parenthesis immediately following the
Catalogue price.

Stockholders have the privilege of purchasing at any time any books sold
by the Company at a small advance upon the cost, this privilege being
limited in amount to a sum not exceeding, in any one year, the par value
of the Stock owned by the purchaser. For prices to stockholders, see
catalogue.

Some limitation is, obviously, necessary; otherwise any one at enmity
with the enterprise, might, on an investment of $10.00, purchase an
unlimited quantity of books at reduced prices, and undersell us with our
own customers. The privilege is open to Stockholders immediately upon
investment being made.

What lover of good books can not afford to take at least _ten shares_?
How many friends might, with advantage, take a hundred, or more shares?
A million dollars capital would not suffice to manufacture the books our
patrons are urgently calling for: we are doing now an immense business
for the amount of our capital, which business will be increased as our
resources are enlarged.

                     76 Per Cent. Annual Dividends!

_The Literary Revolution_ has never assumed to furnish books at a price
below what would permit a fair profit, nor has it ever solicited
investments on the basis of expectation of fabulous returns. The facts
are simple, and the opportunities offered are based on common sense. If
you invest $10.00 you have reasonable expectation of not less than 10
per cent. annual dividend, but as a Stockholder you also have the
opportunity of purchasing with your dividend books at a price below what
they would cost one _NOT_ a Stockholder--that makes your dividend equal
to about _16 per cent_. Again, you, as a Stockholder, are allowed the
opportunity of purchasing, _if you want them_, during each year, books
at _special prices_ to an amount not greater than the par value of your
Stock which, as will be seen from the list of prices to Stockholders,
average (on our own publications) about _40 per cent._ below what the
same books would cost one not a Stockholder. In other words, you can buy
$16.00 worth of books for about $10.00, thus saving $6.00, which is
equal to 60 per cent. on your $10.00 stock, which, added to 16 per cent.
dividend, makes practically _76 per cent._ per annum on your investment.
If you own $100.00 or more Stock you have similar privileges to the
larger amount--if you don't want so many books for your own use you can
accommodate your friends or you can sell the books at a profit.

                   Literary Revolution Savings-Bonds.

To meet the convenience of friends of the enterprise who hesitate to
make an investment of a character so permanent as in the Capital Stock
of the Company, a _Savings-Bond_ is now issued, payable three months,
six months or twelve months from its date, which affords every facility
given by the ownership of Stock, but pays approximately _60 per cent._
per annum, instead of 76 per cent. A copy of the Bond, elsewhere, gives
full particulars.

Remittances may be addressed to John B. Alden, or to

                     THE ALDEN PUBLISHING COMPANY,
                     _393 Pearl Street, New York_, or any Branch Office.




                        Alphabetical Catalogue.


Æsop's Fables, complete, illustrated. Ideal Edition, cloth, 25c. (6c),

*Abbott, Jacob. Rollo's Tour in Europe. 10 vols., ill., 16mo, $10.00,
  reduced to $5.60 (50c)

--*The Florence Stories. 6 vols., 12mo, ill., $5.00, reduced to $3.50
  (50c)

A'Kempis. Imitation of Christ, The. By Thomas A'Kempis. 12mo, cloth,
  45c. (10c);


                     Alden's Illustrated Juveniles.

Alden. Stories and Ballads for Young Folks. By Ellen Tracy Alden,
  Illustrated, cl., 45c. (15c);

Alden's Juvenile Story Book. 12mo, 302 pages, illustrated, fine cloth,
  ornamented, 45c. (15c);

--Juvenile Gems of Song and Story. Ideal Edition, extra cloth,
  ornamented, red edges, 45c. (15c);

--Juvenile Book of Knowledge, illustrated, 12mo, cloth, ornamented, 45c.
  (15c);


                     Alden's Home and Handy Atlas.

Alden's Home Atlas of the World. In one large quarto vol. 11x14 inches
  in size, containing 112 pages of handsomely engraved and colored maps.
  Also an index of over 5,000 cities, rivers, mountains, etc. throughout
  the world, showing exact location. Cloth, $2.25 (80c); Agents Wanted.

Alden's Handy Atlas of the World. 133 colored maps, diagrams, tables,
  etc. Price, 30c. (8c);


                      Alden's Manifold Cyclopedia.

Alden's Manifold Cyclopedia of Knowledge and Language is publishing in
  30 or more volumes, with thousands of illustrations. Ideal Edition,
  about 640 pages each, Brevier type. Price per vol., cloth, 60c. (20c);
  half Morocco, marbled edges, 75c. (25c). A specimen vol. may be
  ordered and returned if not wanted. _sixteen vols. now ready._ Volumes
  issued at intervals of about one month. Price of the sixteen vols.,
  cloth, for cash received before July 1, 1889. $8.00 For half Morocco,
  add 15 cents a volume. AGENTS WANTED.


                      Alden's Literary Cyclopedia.

Alden's Cyclopedia of Universal Literature is publishing in volumes of
  about 500 pages each. Ideal Edition, large type. It will be completed
  in not less than 15 nor more than 20 volumes, issued at intervals.
  Price per volume, cloth, gilt top, 60c. (20c); half Morocco, 70c.
  (25c). A specimen volume may be ordered and returned if not wanted.
  _13 vols., now ready._ Price of the first 18 vols., cloth, for cash
  received before July 1, 1889, $6.50 For half Morocco, add 10 cents a
  volume. AGENTS WANTED.


                     Alden's "New" Ideal Revolver.

Alden's Ideal Revolving Book-Case, No. 3. Has four shelves, adjustable,
  giving 136 inches of shelf room, size of case 19 inches wide, 12
  inches deep, 48 inches high, or four feet, including the base. Is made
  of perfectly kiln-dried cherry birch, with birds-eye maple panels;
  hand carved; built on ingenious but simple interlocking principles,
  doing away, mainly, with screws, nails or glue; may be knocked down
  and set up again in five minutes; price $10.00 at store.

No. 4, similar to No. 3, but without the birds-eye panels, and "solid"
  instead of "knock down," price $8.00 at store.

Allen, History and Mystery of Common Things. By W. C. Allen. 12mo,
  cloth, 50c. (15c);

Allerton, Poems of the Prairies. By Ellen P. Allerton. Ideal Edition,
  cl. gilt top, 60c. (25c);


                American Humorists--American Patriotism.

American Humorists. Sketches, with illustrative specimens, of the six
  most famous of American humorous writers, Irving, Holmes, Lowell,
  Artemus Ward, Mark Twain, and Bret Harte. By H. R. Haweis. Elzevir
  Edition, cloth; price reduced from $2.00 to 25c. (9c);

American Patriotism. Famous Orations and Patriotic Papers connected with
  American History. Compiled by S. H. Peabody, President of the
  University of Illinois. 12mo, 681 pages, Brevier type, half Morocco,
  marbled edges. 85c. (25c);


                 Greek and Roman Classics, in English.

Ancient Classics for English readers. The volumes contain about 200
  pages each, Brevier type, leaded, and are sold separately, in paper,
  at _10c._; cloth, 25c. (6c). Also bound three volumes in one, arranged
  in the order given below. Price per volume, half Russia, 60c. (17c);
  per set of 6 volumes, _$2.85_ (70c). 1. Cæsar; 2. Herodotus; 3.
  Cicero; 4. Demosthenes; 5. Aristotle; 6. Plato; 7. Horace; 8. Juvenal;
  9. Tacitus; 10. Virgil; 11. Homer's Iliad; 12. Homer's Odyssey; 13.
  Xenophon; 14. Æschylus; 15. Sophocles; 16. Pliny; 17. Aristophanes;
  18. Greek Anthology; 19. Euripides; 20. Livy; 21. Ovid; 22;
  Thucydides; 23. Lucian; 24. Plautus and Terrence; 25. Lucretius; 26.
  Pindar; 27. Hesiod and Theognis. Volumes numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
  10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 cannot be supplied in half Russia. Nos. 6 and
  10 cannot be supplied in paper.


                       Marcus Aurelius, Emperor.

Antoninus, Marcus Aurelius. The Thoughts of, translated by George Long,
  with a sketch of his Life and a view of his Philosophy. Ideal Edition,
  cloth, 30c. (7c)

Arabian Nights' Entertainments. Large 12mo, cloth, 30c. (7c)


                     Argyll, Arnold, Bacon, Locke.

Argyll; The Unity of Nature. 12mo, 354 pages, Long Primer type, leaded,
  cloth, 75c. (25c)

--Primeval Man. Uniform with The Reign of Law. Cloth; price reduced from
  $1.50 to 40c. (15c)

Arnold. Light of Asia, by Edwin Arnold, cloth, 30c. (7c)

--Indian Song of Songs, by Edwin Arnold, cloth, 25c. (6c)

--Pearls of the Faith, by Edwin Arnold, cloth, 25c. (6c)

*Arthur. Home Stories. By T. S. Arthur, 6 vols., ills., 16mo, cloth, per
  set, $3.40 (50c)

1. Sunshine at Home.

2. Hidden Wings.

3. Sowing the Wind.

4. Not Anything, or Peace.

5. The Peacemaker.

6. After a Shadow.

Bacon's Essays. With notes of Devey. Elzevir Ed., cloth. 3Oc. (10c)

Bacon's Essays, and Locke on the Understanding, in one vol. half Russia,
  45c. (15c)

Baldwin. Maurice Rossman's Leading. A Novel. By Mary R. Baldwin, 12mo,
  cloth, 60c.

Baring-Gould. Curious Myths of the Middle Ages. By S. Baring-Gould.
  Elzevir Ed., cloth, 40c. (15c)

--Legends of the Patriarchs and Prophets. By S. Baring-Gould. Elzevir
  Ed., cloth. 50c. (15c)


                      Beecher, Beckford, Birrell.

Beckford. Vathek. By Wm. Beckford. Ideal Edition, Small Pica type,
  cloth, 30c. (10c)

Beecher, Henry Ward. Lectures to Young Men. A new and handsome edition,
  large type, large 12mo, cloth, gilt top. Price reduced from $1.50 to
  60c. (20c)

Bernard. Civil Service Reform. By Geo. S. Bernard. Ideal Ed., cloth,
  30c.

Birrell. Obiter Dicta. By Augustine Birrell. Ideal Ed., cl., 30c. (7c);
  half Mo., 45c. (12c)

Book-Lover's Rosary. Elzevir Edition, gilt edges, ornamented, 30c. (10c)

*Book of the Ocean, and Life on the Sea. Thrilling adventures of ocean
  life. 12mo, cloth, illustrated, 672 pages, $1.25, reduced to 80c.
  (15c)

Berkowitz. Judaism on the Social Question. By Rabbi H. Berkowitz, D.D.
  Ideal Ed., cl., 60c. (20c)


                    Boswell, Bronte, Bryant, Buffon.

Boswell's Life of Johnson. Croker's Edition, in 4 volumes, large 12mo,
  cloth, $2.75 ($1.25)

Brooklyn Bridge, Orations at opening, by Hewitt and Dr. R. S. Storrs,
  cloth, 25c. (10c)

Bronte. Jane Eyre. By Charlotte Bronte, 12mo, cloth, 30c. (6c)

Brown. A Sea-Island Romance. By William Perry Brown, 12mo, cloth, 60c.
  (20c)

Bryant's Poems. Ideal Edition, cloth, 3Oc. (7c)

Buffon's Natural History. Large 12mo, 588 pages, numerous illustrations,
  Cloth. 60c. (20c)

Bulwer's Wit and Wisdom. Compiled by Callie L. Bonney, 12mo, cloth, 60c.
  (20c)


                         Bunyan, Burke, Burns.

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress. New Ideal Edition; cloth, 20c. (4c)

Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful. New Ideal Edition, Long Primer type,
  cloth, 30c. (10c)

Burns, Robert: Poetical Works. Elzevir Edition, complete in three
  volumes, of 353, 330 and 356 pages. Bourgeois type, leaded. The set,
  fine cloth, $1.40 (45c); full Russia, gilt edges, $2.25 (60c)

--The same complete in one volume, large octavo, large type, 65c. (15c);

Caesar, Life of. By Liddell. Ideal Edition, Long Primer type, cloth,
  25c. (7c)

Calhoun, Life of John C. Calhoun, by Jenkins. Large 12mo, 454 pages.
  Cloth, price 60c. (17c)

Campbell's Interest Tables. 16mo, cloth, price reduced from $2.50 to
  60c. (25c) Showing interest on any sum from $1.00 to $10,000 at 3, 7,
  8, 9 and 10 per cent. Also Time Table, etc.


                     Carlyle's Choice Works--Cheap.

Carlyle. Heroes, Hero Worship and the Heroic in History. By Thomas
  Carlyle. Ideal edition Brevier type; cloth, 30c. (11c)

--Popular Works. French Revolution, Elzevir Edition, Brevier type,
  leaded, 2 volumes, cloth $1.00 (30c) Past and Present, 12mo, cloth,
  40c. (10c)


                        Carlyle--A Fine Edition.

--Essays. Containing Portraits of John Knox: Signs of the Times; Jean
  Paul Friedrich Richter, again; Schiller; Characteristics, and Other
  Essays. Price $1.00 (20c)

--Essays: Goethe, Burns, Scott, and other Essays. $1.00 (20c)

--Heroes, Early Kings of Norway, etc. Containing Early Kings of Norway;
  Heroes and Hero Worship; Life of Heyne; Jean Paul Richter: Chartism.
  Price $1.00 (20c)

--Sartor Resartus; Past and Present, etc., $1.00 (20)

--Life of Frederick the Great. 4 vols., $4.50 ($1.00)

--Life of Cromwell, and of John Sterling; 2 vols. $2.25 (50c)


                            The Faith Cure.

Carter. Divine Healing: or, The Atonement for Sin and Sickness. By Capt.
  R. Kelso Carter. Small quarto. Small Pica type, paper, 25c. (10c),
  cloth, 60c. (20c)

*Chambers's Encyclopedia, edition of 1885. Nearly 13,000 pages. With
  revised American statistics. Containing 27,000 distinct Articles and
  index to 17,000 incidentally mentioned subjects. 12 vols. Crown, 8vo,
  nonpariel type, $18.00, reduced to $8.00 ($1.50); _at store_

--Chambers's English Literature. Edited by Robert Chambers, LL.D.,
  revised by Robert Caruthers, LL.D. 8 vols. in 4, cloth, $2.50 (70c)

Charles. The Schonberg-Cotta Family. Small quarto. Paper _15c._ (7c);
  cloth, 30c. (10c)

*Chavasse. Advice to a Wife. By Henry P. Chavasse. 16mo, cloth, 75c.
  (15c)

--*Advice to a Mother on the Management of Her Children. 16mo, cloth,
  75c. (15c)

Chinese Classics. The works of Confucius and Mencius. Translated by
  James Legge, D.D. Library Ed., Pica type, small octavo, cloth, 85c.
  (35c)


                  The Great Classics, for Young Folks.

*Church, Alfred J. Stories from the Classics. Each 1 vol., 12mo, cloth,
  $1.50, reduced to 75c. (25c)

  Stories from Homer,

  Stories of Virgil,

  Stories from the Greek Tragedians,

  Roman Life in the Days of Cicero,

  Stories from Livy,

  Stories of the Persian War from Herodotus,

  Two Thousand Years Ago; or the Adventures of a Roman Boy,

  Stories from Herodotus,

Classic Comedies. Goldsmith, Sheridan and Jonson. Ideal Ed., cloth, 50c.
  (15c)


                  Classic Poems, Ideal Edition, Cheap.

Classic Poems, first series. Ideal Edition. 364 pages, large type,
  cloth, 45c. (14c), half Mco. 60c. (15c)

Classic Poems, second series. Ideal Edition, 445 pages, cloth, 45c.
  (14c), half Mco. 60c. (15c)

First Series: Oliver Goldsmith, Robert Burns, George Eliot, Jean
  Ingelow, Schiller, Alfred Tennyson, Campbell, Coleridge, Macaulay,
  Aytoun, Edgar A. Poe, Goethe.

Second Series: Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Robert Browning, Southey, De
  Morlaix, Keats, Shelley, Matthew Arnold, Chaucer, Hood, Cowper, Gray,
  Addison, Spenser, Richard H. Dana.

Cooper, Peter. Life of, by C. Edwards Lester, cloth. 25c. (8c)

Cooper. The Last of the Mohicans. By J. Fennimore Cooper. 12mo, cloth,
  35c.

Cottin. Elizabeth; or, the Exiles of Siberia. By Madame Cottin. Ideal
  Ed., 7c.; cl., 25c. (7c)


               The Kalevala--A Great Literary Discovery.

Crawford. The Kalevala. The National Epic Poem of the Finlanders.
  Translated into English Verse, by Dr. John Martin Crawford. In two
  volumes, small octavo, Small Pica type, leaded, cloth, gilt top, $2.25
  (75c); half Morocco, $2.75 (85c); in one volume cl., gilt top, $1.70
  (60c)

Cromwell, Life of. By Lamartine. Ideal Edition, paper, _8c._, post-paid;
  cloth, 25c. (7c)

*Cruden's Concordance to the Holy Bible. _Unabridged._ 872 three-column
  pages, imperial octavo, bound in cloth, price $1.50, reduced to $1.10
  (20c)


                            The Lamplighter.

Cummins. The Lamplighter. A Novel, by Maria S. Cummins. New Edition.
  Cloth, _50c._ (20c)

Curtis. The Fate of a Fool. By Emma Ghent Curtis. 12mo, cloth, 60c.
  (20c)

Dante's Divine Comedy, The Story of. By Harriette R. Shattuck. Ideal
  Ed., cloth. 20c. (4c)

*D'Aubigne. History of the Reformation. By J. H. Merle D'Aubigne, D.D.
  With about 200 wood engravings. 727 large double-column pages, $3.00,
  reduced to $1.75 (60c)


                    Daudet's Great Satirical Novel.

Daudet. The Immortal. By Alphonse Daudet. 12mo, cloth. 60c. (20c)

Davidson. The Poetry of the Future. By Jas. Wood Davidson. Elzevir Ed.,
  cl., gilt top, _60c._ (25c)


                    Dawson's Story of Earth and Man.

Dawson. The Story of the Earth and Man. By Sir John W. Dawson. Small
  quarto, cloth, illust., price reduced from $1.50 to 50c. (20c) Cheap
  edition in paper, without illust., _15c._ (4c)

De Foe: Robinson Crusoe. 12mo, cloth, 30c. (7c)

De Stael. Corinne. A Novel. By Madam De Stael, 12mo, cloth, 30c. (9c)

De Quincey: Confessions of an Opium-Eater. Elzevir Ed., cloth, 25c. (7c)


                       The "Boz" Dickens--$3.00!

*Dickens. Charles Dickens' Complete Works, "Boz" Edition, in six vols.,
  small 8vo, good type, with numerous illus., well printed on fair
  paper, cl., $3.00 (75c)

--Illustrated Edition of the works of Charles Dickens, published in
  small octavo volumes, fine cloth, gilt tops, far superior in quality
  to any "cheap" edition in the market. Closing out at _50c._ (10c) per
  volume, 1. Pickwick; 2. Oliver Twist, Pictures from Italy, and
  American Notes; 3. Old Curiosity Shop and Hard Times; 4. Great
  Expectations; 5. Barnaby Rudge; 6. Child's England.

Dickens' Works. Caxton illustrated edition; per vol., cloth. _40c._
  (10c) 1. Pickwick Papers; 2. Martin Chuzzlewit; 3. Child's History of
  England; 4. Little Dorrit.

Dickens. Three Christmas Stories, Carol, Chimes and Cricket. Cloth, 30c.
  (11c)

Donohue. Idyls of Israel and other Poems. By D. J. Donohue. 16mo, cloth,
  gilt top, _80c._ (30c).


                       The Famous Dore Galleries.

Dore Bible Gallery. Containing one hundred superb illustrations and a
  page of explanatory text facing each. Large quarto (10x12 inches),
  cloth, ornamented, price $1.80 (50c) In full Morocco, $7.00; $3.50
  (75c)

*Dore: Paradise Lost. By John Milton. With the celebrated illustrations
  of Gustave Doré, fifty in number, size 10x12 inches. The whole richly
  bound, extra cloth, beveled boards, gilt edges, gold title and
  ornamentation, $1.80 (50c) In full Morocco, $7.00; $3.50 (75c)

--*Dante. Inferno. Translated by Carey. Portrait and 75 full-page
  engravings from designs by Doré. Cheap edition, cloth, $4.00; $1.80
  (30c) In full Morocco, $7.00; $3.50 (75c)

Douglas. Strange Threads. A Novel. By J. Douglas. 12mo, cloth, 60c.
  (15c)

Drake. The Indians of North America. By S. G. Drake. 800 pp., 8vo,
  cloth, $1.25 (40c)

Drisler. Seven Infelicities and One Felicity. A Humorous Story. By Mary
  Drisler. Paper, _5c._


                        Drummond's Natural Law.

Drummond: Natural Law in the Spiritual World. New Edition, cloth, 12mo,
  50c. (15c)

--The same. Cheap Edition, cloth, 30c. (9c)


                         George Eliot's Works.

*Eliot. George Eliot's Complete Works, popular edition, eight vols.,
  12mo, cl. $3.75 (60c)

--*Eliot, George, complete works, a fine library edition, in 8 vols.,
  large 12mo, elegantly bound in half Russia, $5.75 ($1.00)

--Eliot, George, Works of. Small octavo edition, cloth, gilt top. Per
  vol. 60c. (10c); 1. Felix Holt, and Poems; 2. Adam Bede.

--Essays and Leaves from a Note Book. Caxton ed. 40c. (15c)

Eliot, George: Silas Marner. Small Pica type, small quarto, paper _10c._
  (4c); cloth, 25c. (7c)

--Romola. 12mo, cloth, 35c. (7c)

Elzevir Classics. Type always large. Each vol. complete in itself. Vol.
  I. See Classic Poems.

Vol. II. 342 pages. Cloth, 35c. (12c) Contents: By Washington Irving,
  Rip Van Winkle. The Spectre Bridegroom. By Canon F. W. Farrar, The
  Burning of Rome. By Andrew Wilson, The Sea Serpents of Science. By
  James Parton, Sir Isaac Newton. By W. Mattieu Williams,
  World-Smashing, Meteoric Astronomy, Lunar Volcanoes. By Frank H.
  Norton, Paul Gustave Dore. By Bertha Thomas, Richard Wagner. By Dean
  Swift, The Battle of the Books. By Orpheus C. Kerr, "Puts" and
  "Calls," At Easter, Hygeia in the South, The "Last" Man-Epithalamium,
  In Lent, A Fable of Finance, Condensed Tragedies, A Stoop to Conquer,
  Squibs for "The Fourth," Beauty and Booty. By S. Baring-Gould, Legend
  of the Wandering Jew. By J. H. Merle D'Aubigne, Erasmus and Henry
  VIII. From Blackwood's Magazine, James Ferguson, "Astronomer."

Vol. III. Contains 330 pages. Cloth, 35c. (12c) Contents: By George
  Rawlinson. The Civilizations of Asia. By John Caird, Buddhism. By
  Charles Kingsley. The Celtic Hermits. By Cunningham Geikie, The
  Crucifixion. By Frederick W. Farrar, Seneca and St. Paul. By Conybeare
  and Howson, A Half Hour with St. Paul. By Franz Delitzsch, Jesus and
  Hillel. By F. Godet, The Four Chief Apostles. By Mrs. Müller, Life of
  George Müller.

Vol. IV. Contains 363 pages. Cloth, 35c. (12c) Contents: By Herbert
  Spencer, The Coming Slavery, Philosophy of Style. By Matthew Arnold.
  Numbers, Emerson. By George William Curtis, Wendell Phillips. By
  Wendell Phillips, The War for the Union. By Robert Giffen, Progress of
  the Working Classes. By T. H. Huxley, Evidences of Evolution. By John
  Tyndall, Count Rumford. By Edward Orton, Public Health.


                         Emerson and Epictetus.

Emerson. Ralph Waldo Emerson's Popular Works. Nature and Other Essays.
  Ideal Edition, cloth, 30c. (8c); half Morocco, 40c. (15c) Essays,
  First Series. Ideal Edition, cloth, 30c. (8c); half Morocco, 40c.
  (15c) Essays, Second Series. Ideal Edition, cloth. 30c. (8c) Essays
  complete in one vol., half Morocco, 75c. (25c) New England Reformers,
  and Divinity College Address, Ideal Edition, cloth, 35c. (12c)

Emerson's Essays, First Series. Small octavo, Pica type, printed on
  fine, large paper, giving wide margins, and elegantly bound in half
  Morocco, marbled edges. Price 75c. (25c)

English Men of Letters. Each vol. is complete in itself. Vols. I., II.,
  and III. are all sold. IV. Aldus edition half Rus., gilt top,
  contains: Chaucer, by Ward; Spenser, by Church; Cowper, by Goldwin
  Smith; Southey, by Dowden: Milton, by Pattison, 40c. (15c) V. Acme
  edition, contains: De Foe, by Minton; Johnson, by Leslie Stephen;
  Scott, by Hutton; Thackeray, by Trollope; Goldsmith, by Black. Price
  30c. (7c)

Epictetus, The Teachings of, translated with notes. Ideal edition. 210
  pp., cloth, 30c. (10c)

Famous Warriors. Life of Hannibal, by Thomas Arnold of Rugby; Life of
  Cæsar, by H. G. Liddell. Life of Cromwell, by Lamartine. Ideal
  Edition, cloth. 35c. (10c)

*Farmer's Barn Book. By Clater, Youatt, Skinner and Mills. A Treatise on
  the Management of Live Stock in Health and Disease. 12mo, cloth, $1.25
  reduced to 80c. (15c)


                        Farrar, Florian, Fouque.

Farrar. Seekers after God. By Canon Farrar. Long Primer type, leaded.
  12mo, cloth, 40c. (15c)

--Lectures, Addresses and Essays. By Canon Farrar. Ideal Ed., clo. 40c.
  (17c)

Florian's Fables. Translated into English verse by Gen. J. W. Phelps.
  With numerous very fine illustrations by J. J. Grandville. Cloth, gilt
  edges, price $1.15 (40c)

Fouque, Baron De La Motte: Undine Ideal Edition, cloth, 25c. (7c)


                       Franklin Literary Nuggets.

Franklin Literary Nuggets, The. Size 4-1/2 x 6 inches, about 200 pages
  each. Fine cloth binding, gilt tops. Per volume, 30c. (8c)

  1. The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin.

  2. The Castle of Otranto. By Horace Walpole.

  3. My Ten Years' Imprisonment. By Silvio Pellico.

  4. Lessing's Nathan the Wise.

  5 and 6. White's Natural History of Selborne, 2 vols.

  7. Izaak Walton's Complete Angler.

  8. Addison and Steele's Sir Roger de Coverley.

  9. Herodotus' Egypt and Scythia.

  10. Marco Polo's Voyages and Travels.

  11. Sir Thomas Brown's Religio Medici.


                     Froissart, Frost, and Froude.

*Froissart's Chronicles. Chronicles of England, France, Spain, and the
  adjoining countries. By Sir John Froissart. Prefaced by a Life of the
  author and an Introductory Essay by John Lord. Imperial octavo, 650
  pages; 115 illustrations. Cloth. $1.50 (35c)

Frost: Cyclopedia of Eminent Christians. 8vo. 672 pages. Small Pica
  type, cloth, 75c. (25c)

Froude, Jas. A.: Historical and Critical Essays. Ideal Ed. cloth. 50c.
  (15c)

--History of the Knights Templars. Ideal Edition, cloth, 25c. (8c)


                      Dr. Geikie's Popular Books.

Geikie. The Holy Land and the Bible. A Book of Scripture Illustrations
  gathered in Palestine. By Cunningham Geikie, D.D. Beautifully printed
  from Small Pica type, with a map and over 200 fine illustrations, from
  drawings by the celebrated American artists, Harry Fenn and J. D.
  Woodward. In 2 vols, small quarto, cloth. $2.00 (65c); elegantly bound
  in half Morocco. $2-75 ($1.00)

--Hours with the Bible. By Cunningham Geikie, D.D. In 6 vols., 12mo,
  illustrated. I. Creation to Patriarchs: II. Moses to Judges: III.
  Samson to Solomon: IV. Rehoboam to Hezekiah: V. Manasseh to Zedekiah:
  VI. Exile to Malachi. Per vol. cloth. 50c. (20c); half Mco., 65c.
  (25c); per set, cloth. $2.75 (90c); half Morocco. $3.50 ($1.20) Index
  vol. including Texts of the Bible Illustrated; cloth, 30c. (10c); half
  Mco., 40c. (11c)

--Entering on Life. By Cunningham Geikie. A Book for Young Men. 12mo,
  cloth, _40c._ (15c)

--The same, Cheap edition, cloth, 30c. (7c.)


                           Gibbon and Goethe.

Gibbon's Rome. With Milman's Notes. 3 vols., 12mo. cloth, $2.00 (35c)

*Goethe's Complete Works. Edited by the Rev F. H. Hedge, D.D., and Prof.
  Leopold Noa. Popular edition, Illustrated. 5 vols., $7.50, reduced to
  $5.75 ($1.00)


                      A Russian Historical Novel.

Gogol. Taras Bulba, By Nikolai Vassilievitch, translated by Jeremiah
  Curtin. cloth, 60c. (20c)

Goldsmith, Oliver, Works of. Edited by Sir James Prior. In 4 vols.,
  12mo, $3.00 ($1.25)

--Vicar of Wakefield: Ideal Edition. Cloth. 30c. (11c)

--She Stoops to Conquer: Ideal Edition. Cloth, 25c. (7c)

Goldsmith, Life of: by Washington Irving. Elzevir Ed., gilt edges, 50c.
  (20c); cloth, 30c. (9c)

Gray. Lost--Two Little Girls. By P.L. Gray. Ideal Edition, large type,
  cloth, 60c. (20c)


                   Green's England--Guizot's France.

Green's Larger History of the English People. 5 vols., 16mo. illustrated
  with about 100 fine engravings: half Morocco, $3.50 ($1.00); the same
  without illustrations, Elzevir Edition, cloth, $2.25 (40c); half
  morocco, $2.75 (60c)

Greenwood, Grace. My Pets, cloth. 35c. (10c); Stories for Home Folks,
  cl., 45c. (15c)

--Merrie England and Bonnie Scotland in 1 vol., 60c. (15c). Stories for
  Home Folks and Stories of France and Italy, in 1 vol., 60c. (15c)

--*Queen Victoria. Her Girlhood and Womanhood. 16mo cloth, ill. $1.50
  reduced to $1.00 (15c)

*Guizot's History of France. Illustrated Library Edition, 427 fine
  engravings, 8 vols., 12mo, half Morocco, $6.00 ($1.25)

Guizot's History of Civilization. 12mo, cloth. 50c. (15c)

Haggard. King Solomon's Mines. By H. Rider Haggard. Paper _5c._, cloth,
  20c. (4c)

Haliburton. Sam Slick, the Clockmaker. Paper _5c._,; cloth, 20c. (4c)


                          Hallam and Hamerton.

Hallam's History of the Middle Ages. _Complete, with all the notes_, in
  four small quarto, finely illustrated volumes, cloth. $2.25 (50c): in
  two vols. half Morocco, marbled edges. $3.00 ($1.00)

Hamerton's The Intellectual Life. Elzevir Ed., cloth, 60c. (20c); half
  Morocco, 75c. (25c)

Hannibal, Life of, by Thomas Arnold of Rugby, 25c. (7c)


                        The Unity of the Truth.

Hark. The Unity of the Truth, in Christianity and Evolution. By J. Max
  Hark D.D. 12mo. 8 pages. Small Pica type, leaded, cloth, gilt top,
  90c. (40c)

*Hartley, Ladies Book of Etiquette. 12mo. cloth, $1.25, reduced to 75c.
  (15c)

*Hartley, Gentlemen's Book of Etiquette. 12mo, cloth, $l.25, reduced to
  75c. (15c)


                       Hawthorne's Popular Works.

Hawthorne's Popular Works. Ideal Edition, cloth binding, each volume
  complete and sold separately.

  Twice Told Tales. First series, 30c (8c) Second series, 30c (8c)

  Twice Told Tales. _New Ed._, 2 vols. in one, fine heavy paper, large
  margins, very fine edition, half Morocco binding, 85c.

  Mosses from an Old Manse. First series, 30c. (8c) Second series, 30c.
  (8c)

  Mosses from an Old Manse. _New Ed._ 2 vols. in one, fine heavy paper,
  large margins, very fine edition, half Morocco binding, 85c.

  Grandfather's Chair, 30c. (8c)

*Henderson. Common Sense in the Kitchen. A Treatise on Cooking, with
  Receipts, etc. 12mo, cloth,

$1.25, reduced to 80c. (15c)

The Woman's Story--20 Famous Women.

Holloway. The Woman's Story, as told by twenty famous American women,
  whose names are appended. Edited by Laura C. Holloway, with a
  biographical sketch and a fine portrait of each author. Large 12mo,
  cloth, _$1.00_ (30c). AGENTS WANTED.

  Harriett Beecher Stowe.

  Harriett Prescott Spofford.

  Rebecca Harding Davis.

  Edna Dean Proctor.

  "Josiah Allen's Wife."

  Nora Perry.

  Augusta Evans Wilson.

  Louise Chandler Moulton.

  Celia Thaxter.

  "Grace Greenwood."

  Abba Gould Woolson.

  Mary J. Holmes.

  Margaret E. Sangster.

  Oliver Thorne Miller.

  Elizabeth W. Champney.

  Julia C. R. Dorr.

  Marion Harland.

  Louisa May Alcott.

  Ella Wheeler Wilcox.

  Rose Terry Cooke.

Holyoake's Manual of Co-operation. Ideal Edition, paper, _10c._; cloth,
  30c. (11c)

*Hood, Thomas, Choice Works. In prose and verse, including "The Cream of
  the Comic Annuals," life of author, portrait; over 200 illus. Crown
  8vo, 775 pp., cloth. $1.50, reduced to 75c. (15c)

Houston, Sam: Life and Achievements of Sam Houston, Hero and Statesman.
  By C. Edwards Lester. With fine portrait. Elzevir Edition, cloth, 30c.
  (8c)

*Hoyle's Games. By Thomas Frere. Revised ed., 16mo, cloth, ills., $1.00,
  reduced to 70c. (15c)


                     Tom Brown at Rugby--10 Cents.

Hughes. Tom Brown at Rugby. By Thomas Hughes. Paper, _10c._ (4c), cloth,
  25c. (7c)


                  Hume's Great History--Fine Edition.

Hume: History of England. With a fine portrait, 6 vols. bound in three,
  8vo, 3,472 pages. Pica type, printed on fine paper, cloth, gilt tops,
  per set, $4.00 ($1.20)

*Hurlbut. Manual of Biblical Geography. A Text-Book on Bible History,
  with Maps, Plans, Charts, Diagrams and Illustrations. By Rev. J. L.
  Hurlbut, D.D. Introduction by Rev. J. H. Vincent, D.D. Royal Quarto,
  158 pages. Price, $2.75, reduced to $2.00 (50c)


                  A New History of French Literature.

Hutson. The Story of Beryl. By Prof. Hutson. Ideal Ed. Paper. _15c._,
  cl., 35c. (10c)

--Out of a Besieged City. By Prof. Hutson. Paper, _10c._, cloth, 25c.
  (6c)

--The Beginnings of Civilization. By Prof. Chas. Woodward Hutson. Ideal
  Ed., cl., 60c. (20c)

--A History of French Literature. By Prof. Chas. Woodward Hutson, of the
  University of Mississippi. 12mo, cloth, $1.10 (40c)


                         Six Famous Statesmen.

International Statesman Series. Biographies of great social and
  political leaders. Edited By Lloyd C. Sanders. Cloth, per vol., 60c.
  (15c)

  1. Lord Beaconsfield. By T. E. Kebbel.

  2. Viscount Palmerston. By Lloyd C. Sanders.

  3. Prince Metternich. By G. B. Malleson.

  4. O'Connell. By J. A. Hamilton.

  5. Lord Bolingbroke. By Arthur Hassall.

  6. Sir Robert Peel. By F. C. Montague.


                         By Washington Irving.

Irving's Collected Works (complete except Washington), The same in 6
  vols., cloth. $4.50 (90c)

Irving's Life of Washington. Illustrated Library Edition, in 4 volumes,
  small octavo, Long Primer type, including 108 fine illustrations,
  cloth, gilt tops, $2.50 (60c); half Morocco. $3.00 (75c) Popular
  Edition. In two vols., 12mo. cloth. $1.25 (35c); half Morocco, $1.75
  (60c)

Irving, Washington, Life of. By R. H. Stoddard. Elzevir Edition, cloth,
  gilt, 25c. (7c)

Irving's Select Works. (30 per cent.).

Tales of a Traveller; paper, 15c.; cloth. 30c.

Wolfert's Roost, etc.; paper, 10c.; cloth, 30c.

Conquest of Granada; paper, 17c.;

Conquest of Spain; paper, 10c.

Life of Mahomet; paper, 20c; cloth, 40c.

Abbottsford and Newstead Abbey; paper, 8c.

Spanish Voyages of Discovery: paper, 10c.

Crayon Papers; paper, 12c; cloth, 25c; cloth, gilt edges, 40c.; half
  Russia, 40c.

Life of Goldsmith; paper, 15c; cloth, 35c; cloth, gilt edges, 45c; half
  Russia, 45c.

Astoria: paper, 15c.

Captain Bonneville, paper, 15c.

Rip Van Winkle and Other Sketches; cloth, 25c. cloth, gilt edges. 40c.

Tour of the Prairies: paper, 10c.

Bracebridge Hall, cloth, 30c.

Knickerbocker's New York, cloth, 30c.

Salmagundi. 12mo. cloth, 30c.

The Sketch Book, 12mo, paper, 15c., cloth, 30c.


                     Jerrold, Johnson, and Jonson.

Jerrold. Mrs. Caudle's Curtain Lectures. By Douglas Jerrold. Ideal Ed.,
  cloth. 30c. (10c)

Johnson. Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia. By Samuel Johnson. Ideal
  Edition, cloth. 25c. (7c)

--Rasselas, Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield, St. Pierre's Paul and
  Virginia, in one vol., cloth, 50c. (20c)

Jonson. Every Man in His Humor. By Ben Jonson. Ideal Edition, cloth,
  25c. (7c)

*Jones and Small. Joyful Tidings and Good News. Sermons by Sam Jones and
  Sam Small. Large 12mo, 316 pages, cloth, 45c. (12c)

*Josephus's Complete Works. Tr. by Whiston. Large quarto; Pica type,
  cloth, $2.00 (30c)


                  Greece and Rome--Popular Histories.

Keightley's History of Rome, 12mo. over 900 pages, cloth, $1.25, reduced
  to 75c. (20c)

Keightley's Popular History of Greece. 480 pages, 12mo, cloth. $1.25,
  reduced to 60c. (20c)

Kennedy. The Railway: Its Wonders and Curiosities. By William Sloane
  Kennedy. With 24 unique engravings. 12mo, cloth, price reduced from
  $1.25 to 75c. (25c)

Kerr, Orpheus C.: Studies in Stanzas, Ballads and Broadsides. 16mo, gilt
  edges, 50c. (18c)


                      Great Kingdoms of the World.

*Kingdoms of the World. Popular Histories, brought down to the present
  time. Each in one vol., 8vo, cloth, $2.00, reduced to $1.25 (20c)

  Italy, By J. S. C. Abbott.

  Russia, By J. S. C. Abbott.

  Austria, By J. S. C. Abbott.

  Prussia. By J. S. C. Abbott.

  Turkey. By Edson L. Clark.

  Egypt. By J.C. McCoan.

  Germany. By Baring-Gould.


                     Kingsley's Hypatia--The Koran.

Kingsley. The Hermits. By Rev. Charles Kingsley. 340 pages, cloth, 40c.
  (15c)

--Hypatia: A Novel. By Charles Kingsley. 12mo, cloth, 30c. (6c)

*Kitto's Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature. 2 vols. 8vo. Price $2.50
  (60c)

Koran of Mohammed, The. Translated by George Sale. 12mo., cloth, 336
  pages, 60c. (20c)


                          Lamartine and Lamb.

Lamartine. Life of Mary Queen of Scots. By Lamartine. Ideal Ed., cloth,
  25c. (7c)

--Fior D'Aliza. By Alphonse de Lamartine. Elzevir Edition, cloth, 30c.
  (11c)

--Life of Cromwell. By Lamartine. Ideal Edition, cloth, 25c. (7c)

Lamb, Charles: Last Essays of Elia, cloth, gilt top, 45c. (15c): half
  Morocco, 65c. (25c) Complete Essays; the two vols. in one, on good
  paper, cloth, 60c. (20c)


                     A Popular Medical Cyclopedia.

Lankester. Family Medical Guide. Edited by Edwin Lankester, M.D., F
  R.S., written by distinguished members of the Royal College of
  Physicians and Surgeons, London. American edition, revised and
  enlarged; large 8vo, 500 pages; price in cloth $4.00, reduced to
  _$1.00._ (35c)

*Lardner. History of the World. By D. Lardner. LL.D., brought down to
  1884, by H. L. Williams. 250 engravings. 12mo, cloth, gilt, $1.25
  reduced to 80c. (15c)

Law. Bionopsis: A True Vision of Life. By Rev. Sidney G. Law. Small
  octavo, Small Pica type, leaded, 443 pages, cloth, $1.50 (45c): cloth,
  gilt edges. $2.00 (50c)

Leggett. A Tramp Through Switzerland. By Benj. F. Leggett, PhD. 12mo,
  cloth, 45c. (14c)

--A Sheaf of Song. By Benj. F. Leggett, Ph.D. 12mo, cloth, 65c. (20c)


                    A Library of Universal History.

Library of Universal History. 4 vols., 12mo, cloth, gilt top. Each
  $1.50, reduced to $1.10 (40c) The set of 4 vols. $3.75 (85c)

  1. Ancient History. By George Rawlinson, M.A.

  2. Mediæval History. By George T. Stokes, D.D.

  3. Modern History. By Arthur St. Geo. Patton.

  4. Geological History. By Edw. Hull, LL.D.


                   A Treasury of the Best Literature.

Library Magazine. First Series: 9 vols. in 6, Jan., 1879, to Dec., 1881,
  5,372 pages; 16mo, cloth, $3.00. Second Series: 7 vols. in 6, Feb.,
  1883, to April, 1886: over 3,300 octavo pages, cloth, $4.00. Vols. I
  and II. combined, Feb.-Dec., 1883, 822 pages, 90c. Vol III.,
  Jan.-July, 1884, 752 pages, 90c. Vol. IV., Aug.-Dec., 1884, 500 pages,
  50c. Vol. V., Jan.-June, 1885, 576 pages, 50c. Vol. VI., July-Dec.,
  1885, 573 pages, 50c. Vol. VII., Jan.-April, 1886, 384 pages, 50c.
  Third Series: Vol II., Nov., 1886 to May, 1887, 710 pages. Vol. III.,
  April to June, 1887, 598 pages. Vol. IV., July to Sept., 1887, 504
  pages. Volume V., Oct. to Dec., 1887, 566 pages. Vol. VI., Jan. to
  April, 1888, 576 pages. Each vol. small quarto, cloth, 65c.; half
  Morocco. 80c. First Series: Vol. V., half Russia, gilt top, 25c. Vol.
  VI., cloth, 20c. Vol. VII., cloth, 20c. The same, half Russia, 25c.
  Vol. VIII., cloth, 30c. Vol. IX., cloth, 20c. (all 20 per cent.).

--Index to The Library Magazine, 1879 to 1888. Small quarto, cloth, 60c.
  (15c)


                  Light Literature: Choice and Cheap.

Light Literature. Always in good and generally in large type, well
  printed, on good paper, and bound in paper covers. Sent _post-paid_ at
  prices affixed. (all 20 per cent).

  Carlyle, Thomas, Chartison 10c

  Carlyle, Thomas, Past and Present 15c

  Cooper, J. Fenimore, Wing and Wing 20c

  Collins, Wilkie, The Moonstone 20c

  De Foe, Life of, by William Minto 10c

  Eliot, George, Felix Holt 20c

  Gibbon, Life of, by J. C. Morrison 10c

  Hay, Mary Cecil, Under the Will 10c

  Irving Tales. Several good short stories 10c

  Johnson, Samuel. Life of, by Leslie Stephen 10c

  Linton E. Lynn. Ione Stewart 20c

  Locke, Life of, by Thomas Fowler 10c

  McKay, Robinson Brown 5c

  Macaulay. The Athenian Orator 2c

  Payne, James. The Canon's Ward 15c

  Pope, Alex. Life of, by Leslie Stephen 10c

  Rawlinson, George. Cyrus the Great 2c

  Read, Charles. A Perilous Secret 20c

  Scott, Sir Walter. Woodstock 15c

  --Chronicles of the Canongate 10c

  --Count Robert of Paris 15c

  --St. Ronan's Well 15c

  --Fortunes of Nigel 15c

  --The Surgeon's Daughter 10c

  --The Heart of Midlothian 20c

  --Castle Dangerous 10c

  --Southey, Life of, by Prof. Dowden 10c


                  Literary Portraits and Biographies.

Literary Portraits. Biographical and critical studies of contemporary
  and classic authors, with selections from their writings. 26 portraits
  and other illustrations. Reprinted from "Literature," Alden's
  illustrated weakly magazine. 454 pages, small quarto, cloth, 90c.
  (30c)

Literary Portraits. Second Series. Uniform in all respects with First
  Series in style and price.


                     Livingstone, Stanley, Africa.

Livingstone, Stanley and other celebrated travels and adventures in
  Africa, with numerous illustrations. 8vo. cloth. 75c. (20c)

Locke, John. On the Conduct of the Understanding. Cloth, 25c. (7c)

*Locke. Art of Correspondence. By John S. Locke. 16mo, cloth, $1.00,
  reduced to 75c. (15c)


                 Longfellow, Lossing, Lowell, Lubbock.

Longfellow: Voices of the Night, and Other Poems. Ideal Edition, cloth.
  30c. (10c) The Spanish Student, and Other Poems; cl., 30c. (10c) The
  above in one vol., half Mco., 60c. (25c)

Longfellow's Prose Works. Hyperion and Outre Mer, in one volume, large
  12 mo., cloth. 60c. (20c)

Lossing. Eminent Americans. By Benson J. Lossing, LL.D. 12mo, cl., 90c.
  (25c); half Mco., $1.10 (35c)

Lowell, James Russell: Early Poems. Ideal Edition, cloth. 30c. (10c)

Lover. Handy Andy. By Samuel Lover, 12mo. cloth. 30c. (8c)

Lubbock. The Pleasures of Life. By Sir John Lubbock. Ideal Edition,
  cloth, 30c. (10c)

*McKeever. Popular stories, by Harriet B. McKeever. Cloth. Each $1.25,
  reduced to 70c. (20c)

  No. 1. Maude and Miriam; or, the Fair Crusader.

  No. 2. Silver Threads.

  No. 3. Westbrooke Parsonage.

  No. 4. Twice Crowned, A Tale of the Days of Queen Mary.

  No. 5. Edith's Ministry.

  No. 6. Woodcliff.


                     Macaulay's England and Essays.

*Macaulay's England. 5 vols., 12mo, cloth, $5.00, reduced to $2.00 (40c)
  The same half Russia, $7.50 reduced to $3.50  (60c)

Macaulay's Essays. On Bacon, Hastings, and Pitt; Ideal Ed., cloth. 35c.
  (8c)

Madagascar. A Sketch. Historical and Descriptive. By Gen. J. W. Phelps.
  12mo, cl., 30c. (10c)


                        Geo. MacDonald's Novel.

MacDonald. Home Again: A Novel. By George MacDonald; paper, _6c._, cl.,
  20c. (4c)

McKay, James T.: Robinson Brown, a Story; paper. _5c._

*Malcom. Bible Dictionary. 18mo, cloth, $1.00, reduced to 60c. (20c)

Martineau. Famous People. Biographical Sketches by Harriet Martineau.
  12mo. cl., 60c. (20c)

*Maryatt, Captain. Principal works of. 3 large vols., 8vo. cloth, $6.00
  reduced to $3.75 (60c)


                    Meredith's Lucile--Joan of Arc.

Meredith. Lucile; A Novel in Verse. By Owen Meredith. Ideal Edition,
  cloth. 30c. (10c)

*Mesnier's French-English and English-French Dictionary. 16mo. cloth,
  70c. (15c)

Michelet. Joan of Arc, Life of. By Jules Michelet. Ideal Edition, cloth,
  25c. (7c)

Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty. Elzevir Edition, cloth, 30c. (7c)


                            Famously Funny.

Miller. What Tommy Did. By Emily Huntington Miller. Illustrated. 16mo.
  cloth. 50c. (15c)

Milton: Poetical Works. Elzevir Edition, 2 volumes, cloth. 80c. (30c):
  half Morocco, $1.10 (35c)

Milton: Prose Works. 12mo. Small Pica type, leaded, with full index
  cloth, 60c. (20c)


                Mitchel's Planetary and Stellar Worlds.

Mitchel. Planetary and Stellar Worlds, By Gen. O. M. Mitchel. Small
  quarto, Small Pica type. Price reduced from $1.50: paper. _15c._,
  cloth. 35c. (7c)

*Montaigne's Complete Works. With life by William Hazlitt. 1 vol.,
  octavo, cloth. With portraits, $3.00, reduced to $1.90 (40c)

*Moody, D. L., Ten Days with. Sermons at Northfield, Mass. 12mo, cloth,
  45c. (12c)

Moore: Poetical Works. Elzevir Edition, 3 volumes, cloth $1.40 (50c);
  full Russia, $2.25 (75c)

--Poems complete. Octavo Edition, cloth, 65c. (15c)

--Lalla Rookh. cloth. 30c. (10c)

*Moore's Universal Assistant and Complete Mechanic, 1016 pages, 500
  engravings, "over 1,000,000 Industrial Facts, Calculations, Receipts,
  Processes, Trade Secrets," for every business. Cloth, $2.50, reduced
  to $1.40 (30c)

--*Three Thousand Things Worth Knowing. Compiled by R. Moore, author of
  the Universal Assistant and Complete Mechanic. Large 12mo, 410 pages,
  of small solid type, cloth, 45c. (12c)


                      Utopia, by Sir Thomas More.

More, Sir Thomas: Utopia. Ideal Edition, cloth. 30c. (10c)

Muller, Geo. Life of the Author of "Life of Trust," by his wife, cl.,
  25c. (10)

Nelson. Dorance; A Novel. By R. E. Nelson. 12mo, cloth, 75c. (25c).

*Newton. Cyclopædia of Bible Illustrations, being a storehouse of
  Similes, Allegories, and Anecdotes. Edited by Rev. R. Newton, D.D.
  12mo, cloth, $1.25, reduced to 90c. (20)


                   Nuttall's Great Dictionary, Cheap.

*Nuttall's Standard Dictionary of the English Language. A new
  illustrated edition; revised, extended, and improved throughout, by
  Rev. James Wood, Edinburgh. 100,000 references and all the new words.
  The handiest lexicon in the world. In large crown 8vo, 832 pp., cloth,
  $1.50, reduced to 90c. (15c) With patent cut-in index, 20 cents extra.

*Old London Street Cries, and Cries of To-Day. 16mo., 50c, reduced to
  25c. (7c)

Oliphant, Mrs. M. O. W. A Country Gentleman. 30c. (10c)

Owen. Dupleix and the Indian Empire. By Samuel J. Owen. Ideal Edition,
  cl., 20c. (4c)


                Brilliant Essays--Beauty and Evolution.

Parker. The Spirit of Beauty. Essays, scientific and æsthetic, by Prof.
  Henry W. Parker; large 12mo, cloth, gilt top, 85c. (25c)

*Parloa. Appledore Cook Book, The. By Miss Parloa. 12mo, cloth, $1.25,
  reduced to 80c. (15c)

Peabody. Cecil's Natural History. I.--Beasts. II.--Birds. III.--Insects.
  By S. H. Peabody, Pres. University of Illinois. With numerous
  illustrations. 12mo. Small Pica type, 90c. (25c)

*Percy. Reliques of Ancient English Poetry. By Bishop Percy. In 3 vols.,
  Royal 8vo, cloth gilt, gilt tops. Price reduced from $18.00 to $5.60
  ($1.50)

Peyton, Thos.: The Glasse of Time. Ideal Edition, cloth, gilt top, 40c.
  (15c)

Phillips, Wendell. Memorial Oration of Geo. W. Curtis, to which is added
  Mr. Phillips's famous address on The War for the Union. Elzevir
  Edition, cloth, 25c. (6c)


                    The Talmud--Interwoven Gospels.

Pick: The Talmud: What it is. By Rev. Bernhard Pick. Ph.D. Ideal
  Edition, cloth. 60c. (20c)

--Apocryphal Life of Jesus. By Rev. Bernhard Pick. Ph.D. Ideal Ed.,
  cloth, 60c. (20c)

--The Jews Since the Destruction of Jerusalem. Ideal Ed., cloth, 20c.
  (4c)

Pittenger. The Interwoven Gospels. The four histories of Jesus Christ
  blended into a complete and continuous narrative in the words of the
  Gospels. According to the American Revised Version of 1881. Compiled
  by Rev. William Pittenger. 12mo, cloth, with maps, 90c. (30c)


                           A Great War Story.

Pittenger. A History of the great Raid and Locomotive Chase in Georgia
  in 1862. By William Pittenger. New edition, large 8vo, illustrated,
  cloth, _$1.50_ (60c)

--The same, cheap ed., the story complete but omitting documents, paper,
  _40c._; cloth, _75c._


                 Wonders and Curiosities of the World.

*Platt. World's Cyclopedia of Wonders and Curiosities. Compiled by I.
  Platt, D.D.; illustrated, nearly 1,000 pages. Large, 8vo, price $3.00,
  reduced to $1.60 (35c)

Plutarch's Lives, complete. An edition in large type, 3 vols., large
  12mo, cloth, former price $4.50, reduced to $2.00 (40c)

--*The same, with unimportant lives omitted. 12mo, cloth, 75c. (15c)

Pratt, Jerry. By Ellen F. Pratt, 12mo, cloth, 75c. (25c).

*Poe. Prose Stories. By Edgar Allan Poe. 12mo, $1.00, reduced to 60c.
  (10c)

Poetical "Wonder-Book." Containing in one octavo volume, richly bound in
  fine cloth, with ink and gold ornamentation, complete poetical works
  of Scott, Burns, and Moore. $1.75 (40c)

Popular Classical Quotations, 320 pages, 12mo. cloth, price $1.50
  reduced to 30c. (6c)

Potwin. The Triumph of Life. By Rev. Thomas Stoughton Potwin. Ideal
  Edit., cl., 60c. (25c)


                       Proctor's Popular Science.

Proctor. Light Science, Familiar Essays, Hereditary Traits, etc. By
  Prof. R. A. Proctor, 8vo. cloth, 90c. (35c)

Pryde. Highways of Literature. By David Pryde. F.R.S.E. Elzevir Ed.,
  cloth, 25c. (7c)

Ramage, C. T. Great Thoughts by Greek Authors. Cloth, 50c. (15c)

Rankin. Ingleside Rhaims. By Rev. J. E. Rankin, D.D. Ideal Edition,
  cloth. 60c. (20c)

Rankin. Hymns Pro Patria. By Rev. J. E. Rankin, D.D. Ideal Edition,
  cloth, 60c. (20c).

Prescott. Ferdinand and Isabella. By Wm. H. Prescott. Illustrated
  Library Edition, in two vols., small octavo, $1.25 (35c) Popular
  edition, without illustrations, one vol., 85c. (20c)

--Prescott's Biographical and Critical Miscellanies. Ideal Edition, cl.,
  40c. (15c); hf Mco., 55c. (20c)


                     Rawlinson's Historical Works.

Rawlinson. Seven Great Monarchies. By George Rawlinson. 3 vols., 12mo,
  with many hundred illustrations and maps. Cloth, gilt tops, $2.75
  (80c)

--Rawlinson's History of Ancient Egypt. With Several Hundred
  Illustrations, in two large 12mo vols., cloth, gilt tops. Price of the
  set reduced from $6.00 to $1.50 (50c)

--Historical Evidences. By Rawlinson. 12mo, cloth, gilt top. 60c. (20c)

--Egypt and Babylon from Sacred and Profane Sources. By Rawlinson, cl.,
  gilt top, 50c. (15c)

--Religions of the Ancient World. By Rawlinson. 12mo, cloth, gilt top,
  50c. (15c)

Reade. A Good Fight. A Novel. By Chas. Reade, 12mo, cloth, 30c. (6c)

*Recitations and Readings, Two Hundred. 350 pages, 12mo, cloth, 45c.
  (12c)

--*Ogilvie's Popular. 12mo. 360 pages, cloth, 45c. (12c)

--*Ostler Joe, and Other Choice Recitations. 12mo. 372 pages, 45c. (12c)

Richardson. Choice of Books, The. By Prof. C. F. Richardson. Cloth. 30c.
  (8c)

Roget's Thesaurus. 12mo, half Russia, price reduced from $2.50 to $1.25
  (40c); cloth, $1.15 (30c) Either style with patent cut-in index, 40
  cents extra.


                           Rollin and Ruskin.

*Rollin's Ancient History. Small Pica type, large quarto, cloth, $2.00
  (35c)

Ruskin's Choice Works. Sesame and Lilies. Cloth, 30c. (10c) Crown of
  Wild Olive. Cloth. 30c. (10c) Ethics of the Dust: cloth, 30c. (10c)
  The three volumes in one, half Morocco, 60c. (20c)

Ruskin, John, Works of. Vols. sold separately as priced: 1. Fors
  Clavigera, 2 vols., $2.25 (50c) 2. Arrows of the Chace; Aratra
  Penteleci: Construction of Sheepfolds, $1.20 (25c) 3. The Seven Lamps
  of Architecture; Architecture and Painting; Queen of the Air; Ethics
  of the Dust, $1.20 (25c)

--Art and Life; A Ruskin Anthology. Compiled by Wm. Sloane Kennedy.
  Small octavo, with two portraits and other illus.; cloth, gilt top,
  $1.15 (30c); half Morocco, $1.40 (45c)


                  St. Augustine--St. Pierre--Schiller.

St. Augustine, Confessions of. Translated by E. D. Pusey. D.D. Ideal
  Edition, cloth. 60c. (16c)

Saintine. Picciola. Translated from the French of J. X. B. Saintine.
  Ideal Ed., cloth, 30c. (10c)

St. Pierre. Paul and Virginia. From the French of Bernadin St. Pierre.
  Ideal Ed., cl., 30c. (12c)

Sayings, Wise and Otherwise, by the author of Sparrowgrass Papers,
  cloth, 30c. (8c)

*Schiller: Complete Works. Library Ed. Ill., large type, 8 vols. 12mo,
  cloth, $12.00, reduced to $6.75 (1.50)

Schiller's History of the Thirty Years' War in Germany. Elzevir Ed.,
  cloth, 50c. (15c)

Schmauk. Charms and Secrets of Good Conversation. By Theodore E.
  Schmauk; 32mo, paper, 10c.

Science Essays. Spencer's Philosophy of Style, Huxley's Evidences of
  Evolution, Wilson's Sea Serpents of Science. Williams's World
  Smashing. Rawlinson's Civilizations of Asia; cloth, 25c. (8c)

Scott. Beautiful Homes. The Art of beautifying suburban home grounds, by
  Frank J. Scott, large octavo, very finely illustrated, handsomely
  bound, price reduced from $8.00 to $3.00 ($1.00)


                        Scott's Waverley Novels.

Scott. Waverley Novels. By Sir Walter Scott. New. 1888, Library Edition,
  with illustrations; 12 vols., large 12mo, cloth, gilt top, price $7.75
  ($1.50)

Scott. Waverley Novels. Fine Library edition, small octavo, gilt top.
  The following volumes are sold separately at 50c. (10c), each: 1.
  Woodstock, 2. Count Robert, 3. Peveril of the Peak, 4. Antiquary, 5.
  Legend of Montrose, 6. Anne of Geierstein, 7; Fortunes of Nigil, 8.
  Bride of Lammermoor, 9. St. Ronan's Well, 10. Midlothian, 11. The
  Pirate, 12. Fair Maid of Perth, 13. The Monastery, 14. The Abbot, 15.
  Red Gauntlet, 16. The Betrothed, 17. Quentin Durward.

Scott, Sir Walter: Poetical Works. 4 volumes, cloth, $1.75 (70c); half
  Morocco, $2.25 (90c) The same in one vol., 8vo, cloth. 65c. (15c)

The Lady of the Lake. Cloth, 30c. (10c)

--Ivanhoe. By Sir Walter Scott, 12mo, cloth, 35c. (7c)


            The Ideal Shakespeare--Six Vols., big type, $3!

Shakespeare. The Ideal Shakespeare. The text complete in 12 volumes,
  Long Primer type, fine heavy paper, bound in fine cloth, gilt tops,
  price $6.00 ($2.50); half Morocco, $7.20 ($2.50); The same, on lighter
  paper bound in 6 vols., cloth. _$3.00_ ($1.40) An extra vol., giving
  glossary, concordance, etc., cloth. 50c. (15c); half Morocco, 60c.
  (20c) See Elzevir Library for plays at _7 cts._ each. 20 for $1.00.

*Shakespeare. Complete Poetical and Dramatic Works. More than 1,000 pp.,
  8vo, sheep, $4.50, reduced to $2.00 (35c) The same, cloth, $2.00,
  reduced to $1.50 (25c)

Shakespeare's Hamlet. Elzevir edition, half Russia, price nominal, 20c.
  (4c)

*Shakespearian Quotations, Dictionary of. Cl., 12mo, $1.25, reduced to
  85c. (20c)


                        The School for Scandal.

Sheridan. The School for Scandal. By Richard Brinsley Sheridan. Ideal
  Ed., cloth, 25c. (6c)

Smalley. History of the Republican Party, by Eugene V. Smalley. New
  edition, revised to 1888; with numerous portraits. 12mo, paper. _25c._
  (10c), cloth, 60c. (20c)

Smith's Bible Dictionary. Exact reprint of the Boston $3.00 edition.
  Cloth, 75c. (20c)

Smith. Lang Syne; or The Wards of Mount Vernon. By Mary Stuart Smith.
  12mo, paper, 30c. (10c)., cloth, 60c. (20c)

Smith. The London Medical Student. By Albert Smith. 12mo, cloth, 50c.
  (20c).


                          By Herbert Spencer.

Spencer, Herbert: On Education. Elzevir Edition, cloth, 50c. (15c)

--Data of Ethics, Progress and Its Laws. Philosophy of Style, etc., 8vo
  cloth, 90c. (35c)


                Standard Poets. Fine and Cheap Editions.

Standard Poets. Library and Presentation Editions (all 20 per cent.).

  S. P.    Aytoun and Macaulay, 45c.

  *Bo.    Coleridge, 55c.

  *Bo.    Cowper, 55c.

  *Bo.    Crabbe, 55c.

  *L. P.    George Eliot 60c.

  +L. P.    Goldsmith, 55c.

  Br.    Hemans, 55c.

  *S. P.    Herbert, 50c.

  L. P.    Hood, 55c.

  L. P.    Ossian, 50c.

  *L. P.    Poetry of Flowers, 50c.

  *S. P.    Procter, Adelaide, 50c.

  *P.    Rogers, 50c.

  *L. P.    D. G. Rossetti, 50c.

  +L. P.    Schiller, 50c.

  Br.    Scott, 50c.

  *N.    Spenser, 55c.

  *L. P.    H. Taylor, 50c.

  *S. P.    Thomson, 50c.

  +L. P.    Wesley, Charles, 50c.

  *Bo.    H. Kirke White, 50c.

Abbreviations:--The letters prefixed to the above titles indicate the
type used in each volume, as follows: N., Nonpareil; M., Minion; Br.,
Brevier; Bo., Bourgeois; L. P., Long Primer; S. P., Small Pica; P.,
Pica. Titles marked with the asterisk (*), I have also in plain cloth
binding, at a price 15 per cents lower. Those marked with the obelisk
(+), I have in plain cloth only, at a price of 15 cents lower.

Stephens, Alex. H., Life of. By Frank H. Norton. Elzevir Edition, cloth,
  25c. (6c)

Stevenson. The Merry Men and Other Tales. By R. L. Stevenson. 12mo,
  cloth, 30c. (8c)

--Prince Otto: A Romance. By R. L. Stevenson. Paper, _5c._; cloth, 20c.
  (4c)

Stretton. Bede's Charity: A Novel, by Hesba Stretton. 12mo, cloth, 30c.
  (10c)

Stowe. Uncle Tom's Cabin. By Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe. 12mo, cloth,
  large type, price $1.00, reduced to 85c. (15c)

--*Bible Heroines. By Harriet Beecher Stowe. With an illustration in oil
  from a celebrated painting by Paul Delaroche. 8vo, cloth, former
  price, $2.50, reduced to 90c. (35c)

*Sue, Eugene. The Wandering Jew. 12mo, $1.50, reduced to 85c. (15c)

--*The Mysteries of Paris. 12mo, $1.50, reduced to 85c. (15c)

Swinburne. Locrine; A Tragedy. By Algernon Charles Swinburne. 12mo,
  cloth, 25c. (6c)

Swiss Family Robinson. 12mo, cloth, 35c. (6c)

Tadlock. Bohemian Days. By Clara Moyse Tadlock. A narrative of a recent
  journey around the world. Small 8vo, cloth, finely illustrated, $1.50
  (60c)

Taine's History of English Literature. Large 12mo, Brevier type,
  _unabridged_, cloth, 75c. (20c)

*Talmage, Dr. T. De Witt. The Wedding Ring, etc. A Series of Sermons.
  12mo, cloth, 45c. (12c)

*--The Battle for Bread. Sermons. 12mo, cloth, 45c. (12c)


                      Bayard Taylor's Famous Book.

Taylor. Views Afoot; or Europe Seen with Knapsack and Staff. By Bayard
  Taylor. With two portraits and an introduction by N. P. Willis. 12mo,
  481 pages. Long Primer type, cloth, 60c. (20c)


                     Taylor's Popular Health Books.

Taylor. Popular Health Books. By George H. Taylor, M.D. Health by
  Exercise, 12mo, illustrated; cloth, _$1.00_ (50c); Health for Women,
  cloth. _75c._ (35c); Manual Massage, 12mo, cloth, _75c._ (35c);
  Mechanical Massage, 12mo, cloth, _75c._ (35c); Paralysis, 12mo, cloth,
  _75c._ (35c); Pelvic and Hernial Therapeutics. 12mo, cloth. _$1.00_
  (50c)

Taylor. The Progress of Learning. By Geo. Lansing Taylor, S.T.D. 12mo,
  cloth, 30c. (8c)


                          Thackeray's Novels.

Thackeray. Complete Works of Wm. M. Thackeray Library Edition, with
  profuse illustrations; 10 volumes, large 12mo. cloth, gilt top, price
  $6.50 ($1.00) hf Mco., marbled edges, $9.00 ($1.90)

Illus. Library ed., small 8vo, gilt top. Odd volumes of this fine
  edition are sold at 60c. (10c) each. 2. Paris, Irish, and Eastern
  Sketches; 3. Barry Lyndon. Great Hoggarty Diamond; 4. Roundabout
  Papers, Four Georges, etc.; 5. Burlesques, Yellowplush Papers. 6.
  Christmas Books, Book of Snobs, and Ballads.


                     From Log Cabin to White House.

Thayer. Garfield. Life of James A. Garfield, or from Log Cabin to the
  White House. By William M. Thayer With Eulogy by Hon. James G. Blaine.
  Large 12mo. Cloth, 60c. (22c)

*Thomas. The American Fruit Culturist. 8vo, cloth, $3.00, reduced to
  $1.15 (30c)


                     The Elzevir Library--Continued

                  (All 40 per cent. to Stockholders.)


                          By MAURICE THOMPSON.

300 Browsing and Nibbling. 2c

302 Cuckoo Notes. 3c

303 Anatomy of Bird Song. 3c

305 Some Hyoid Hints. 2c


                               BIOGRAPHY.

11 Sir Isaac Newton. James Parton. 2c

16 Life of Gustave Doré. Illustrated. 2c

35 Alex. H. Stephens. Norton. 8c

38 Richard Wagner. Bertha Thomas. 2c

41 Peter Cooper. C. Edwards Lester. 8c

50 Life of Irving, by R. H. Stoddard, and three other biographical
  sketches. 10c

75 Sam Houston. C. Edwards Lester. 15c

100 James Ferguson, the Astronomer. 2c

104 Count Rumford. John Tyndall. 2c

135 Wendell Phillips. Geo. Wm. Curtis. 2c

142 Emerson. Matthew Arnold. 2c

155 Thomas Carlyle. Augustine Birrell. 2c

178 Life of Hannibal. Thomas Arnold, of Rugby 8c

183 Julius Cæsar. H. G. Liddell. 8c

219 Charles Brockden Brown. Prescott. 3c

220 Cervantes.    ' 3c

221 Sir Walter Scott.    ' 5c

222 Moliere. Wm. H. Prescott. 3c

  Marcus Aurelius. Matthew Arnold. 3c

  Thackeray. By author of Rab and His Friends. 5c

  Cyrus the Great. Geo. Rawlinson. 2c


                     ANCIENT CLASSICS--_Each 10c._

These are not literal translations, but, far more interesting to the
average reader, they are biographical and critical, giving extended
selections (translated) at once characteristic of the author, and
entertaining.

22 Cæsar. Anthony Trollope.

23 Herodotus. Geo. C. Swayne.

24 Cicero. W. Lucas Collins.

31 Aristotle. Sir Alex. Grant.

34 Horace. Theodore Martin.

39 Juvenal. Edward Walford.

45 Tacitus. W. B. Donne.

73 Homer's Odyssey.

72 Homer's Iliad. W. L. Collins.

77 Æschylus. Bishop of Colombo.

80 Pliny. Church and Brodribb.

81 Aristophanes. W. L. Collins.

82 Greek Anthology. Lord Neaves.

85 Euripides. W. B. Donne.

86 Livy. W.L. Collins

87 Ovid. Rev. A. Church.

90 Thucydides. W. L. Collins.

91 Lucian. W. L. Collins.

92 Plautus and Terrence. W. L. Collins.

95 Lucretius. W. H. Mallock.

96 Pindar. Rev. F. D. Morice.

97 Hesiod and Theognis. Davis.


                             MISCELLANEOUS.

372 Washington's Farewell Address, Etc. 3c

5 The Sea-Serpents of Science. A. Wilson. 2c

7 Motive and Habit of Reading. C. F. Richardson. 2c

10 Queen Mabel and Other Poems. E. T. Alden 2c

12 World-Smashing, Etc. W. M. Williams. 2c

13 A Half Hour in Natural History. Peabody. 2c

30 Highways of Literature. David Pryde. 8c

40 Sunshine, and Other Stories, E. T. Alden. 2c

42 The Civilizations of Asia. Rawlinson. 2c

371 The Evidences of Evolution. Huxley. 2c

64 Bacon's Essays. _Complete._ 12c

66 The Celtic Hermits. Charles Kingsley. 2c

69 A Half Hour with St. Paul. Conybeare and H. 2c

79 The Spectre Bridegroom. Washington Irving. 12c

83 Fior D'Aliza. Lamartine. 2c

99 The Four Chief Apostles. F. Godet. 2c

103 The Battle of Marathon. Sir Edward Creasy. 2c

109 The Battle of Hastings. Creasy. 2c

111 The Battle of Saratoga. Creasy. 2c

113 Conduct of the Understanding. John Locke. 8c

116 Luther Anecdotes. Dr. Macaulay. 8c

122 Public Health. Edw. Orton. LL.D. 2c

129 Erasmus and Henry VIII. D'Aubigne. 2c

132 On Liberty. John Stuart Mill. 10c

134 Numbers. Matthew Arnold. 2c

137 Progress of the Working Classes. R. Giffen. 3c

143 Thoughts from Greek Authors. Æschylus, Etc. 2c

145 The Same--Aristotle, Etc. 2c

146 The Same--Demosthenes, Diogenes, Etc. 2c

147 The same--Euripides, etc. 2c

155 Thomas Carlyle. By the author of Obiter Dicta. 3c

157 On Leaves. Sir John Lubbock. 10c

160 Obiter Dicta. Augustine Birrell. 15c

365 Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful. 10c

163 Co-operation. G. J. Holyoake. 10c

173 Civil Service Reform. Geo. S. Bernard. 18c

185 Erasmus and Luther. J. A. Froude. 2c

200 Pleasures of Reading. Sir John Lubbock. 2c

229 History of the Knights Templars. Froude. 5c

234 Transcendentalism, an Essay. 5c

281 Rasselas. Dr. Johnson. 7c

290 Picciola. J. X. B. Saintine. 7c

321 The Love of Books. John Bright. 2c

349 Rip Van Winkle. Irving. 2c

  On Education. James Anthony Froude. 3c

  Rab and his Friends. Dr. John Brown. 2c

  The Lamp of Memory. Ruskin. 2c

  Message of the Nineteenth Century to the Twentieth.

  Andrew D. White. 3c

  Women and Marriage. Philip G. Hamerton. 3c

  Selections from Confucius and Mencius. 3c

  The Choice of Books. Prof. Chas. F. Richardson. 10c

  Classic Essays. Part II. (complete). 10c

  Socialism. John Stuart Mill. 5c

  Madagascar, a History. J. W. Phelps. 10c

  Irving's Sketch Book. 15c


                  Standard Poets--Fine Binding--Cheap.

*Poetical Works: Library Edition of the Standard Poets. Each bound in
  half Russia, marbled edges. In new and attractive style of binding.
  12mo, each $1.00,; 60c. (10c):

  Aurora Leigh,

  Browning (Mrs.),

  Browning (Robert),

  Bryant,

  Burns,

  Byron,

  Campbell,

  Chaucer,

  Christian Year,

  Coleridge,

  Cook (Eliza),

  Cowper,

  Dante,

  Eliot (George),

  Familiar Quotations,

  Familiar Poems,

  Faust (Goethe's),

  Goethe's Poems,

  Golden Treasury,

  Goldsmith,

  Hemans,

  Herbert,

  Hood,

  Hugo (Victor),

  Iliad,

  Ingoldsby Legends,

  Jean Ingelow,

  Keats,

  Lady of the Lake,

  Lalla Rookh,

  Lay of the Last Minstrel,

  Longfellow,

  Lucile,

  Marmion,

  Meredith (Owen),

  Milton,

  Moore,

  Mulock (Miss),

  Odyssey,

  Percy's Reliques,

  Pilgrim's Progress,

  Pope,

  Procter,

  Red Letter Poems,

  Schiller,

  Scott,

  Shelley,

  Southey,

  Spanish Ballads,

  Spenser,

  Tennyson,

  Thomson,

  Virgil,

  White, Kirke,

  Whittier,

  Wordsworth.

Good paper, large and clear type, ample margins, excellent press work
and a somewhat odd but remarkably neat and tasteful style of binding,
together with the nature of their contents cause these books to combine
the useful and the ornamental in a high degree. The price, low before,
is reduced one-half.


                      Alden's Manifold Cyclopedia.

Alden's Manifold Cyclopedia of Knowledge and Language is publishing in
  30 or more volumes, with thousands of illustrations, Ideal Edition,
  about 640 pages each, Brevier type. Price per vol., cloth, 60c. (30c);
  half Morocco, marbled edges, 75c. (25c). A specimen vol. may be
  ordered and returned if not wanted. _Sixteen vols. now ready._ Volumes
  issued at intervals of about one month. Price of the sixteen vols.,
  cloth, for cash received before July 1, 1889, $8.00 For half Morocco,
  add 15 cents a volume. AGENTS WANTED.

"I have two encyclopedias--Chambers's and the Britannica--but for handy
reference I prefer the Manifold. It is the Encyclopedia for the student,
author and poor man."--D. W. Hull, Colfax, Iowa.

"The work is marked by uniform excellence, each volume being packed with
just such information on the manifold topics treated of as is ordinarily
desired. The illustrations are numerous and helpful. It is a Cyclopedia
for the people, and it is made available to all by the extremely small
price."--_Christian Intelligencer_, New York.


                   Alden's Cyclopedia of Literature.

Alden's Cyclopedia of Universal Literature is publishing in volumes of
  about 500 pages each, Ideal Edition, large type. It will be completed
  in not less than 15 nor more than 20 volumes, issued at intervals.
  Price per volume, cloth, gilt top, 60c. (20c); half Morocco, 70c.
  (25c). A specimen volume may be ordered and returned if not wanted. 13
  _vols., now ready_. Price of the first 13 vols., cloth, for cash
  received before July 1, 1889, $6.50. For half Morocco, add 10 cents a
  volume. AGENTS WANTED.

"No student of literature can afford to be without this work; and to
subscribe for it at once, and study each volume as it comes out, is the
best way for those who have not much time or money at their disposal.
There is really no reason why the lover of the best literature should
not read this excellent selection steadily through from the first page
to the last."--_National Baptist_, Philadelphia.

"I have received thirteen volumes of Alden's Cyclopedia of Literature,
and am more than satisfied with them. I think the same amount of equally
well digested information could not have been brought to my shelves from
other sources for double the cost of these volumes. Both their manner
and matter are excellent."--H. H. McIntire, West Randolph, Vt.

"We hail with pleasure every new volume of this most unique and
interesting work."--_Farm, Field and Stockman_, Chicago, Ill.

"I have received volumes XII. and XIII. of the Cyclopedia of Universal
Literature, and am more and more surprised at the cheapness and
thoroughness of the work. When completed, I do not think there will be
its equal in the language."--Mrs. Lois J. Campbell, Fairfield, Pa.


                      A Good $10.00 Atlas--$2.25!

Alden's Home Atlas of the World. In one large quarto vol. 11 x 14 inches
  in size, containing 112 pages of handsomely engraved and colored maps.
  Also an index of over 5,000 cities, rivers, mountains, etc.,
  throughout the world, showing exact location. Cloth, $2.25 (80c);
  Agents Wanted.

"The maps are not only very complete, but are brought up to the latest
development of the various countries of the world in railroads,
adjustment of territorial lines and discovery."--_Presbyterian
Quarterly_, Chester, S. C.

"It is one of the marvels of cheapness for which American readers are
already much indebted to this publisher."--_Christian Cynosure_,
Chicago.


                     History of French Literature.

--A History of French Literature. By Prof. Chas. Woodward Hutson, of the
  University of Mississippi. 12mo, cloth, $1.10 (40c).

"It is clear, well arranged, and comprehensive, abounding in
personalities of the writers, which gives the reader a good idea of
their qualities. For a great multitude of readers the volume is just
such a book as they need."--_Inter-Ocean_, Chicago, Ill.

"Evidently Prof. Hutson is an accomplished scholar and a thorough master
of the subject of which he writes. His book is as fresh and bright and
interesting as a novel."--_News_, Charleston, S. C.

"A short history of French literature, clear, comprehensive, well
arranged, extending from its beginnings to the present time; the
interest is enhanced by the personality with which the author invests
the individual writers, and by the well-chosen quotations (translated)
with which he sustains his own opinions."--_Christian Leader_,
Cincinnati, Ohio.

"A handsome manual by Professor C. W. Hutson, author of 'The Beginnings
of Civilization.' It is marked by the same scholarly spirit as was there
shown. It covers the last 900 years in its view. The troubadours, the
fables and the chronicles, the Renaissance ages, the great satirists,
dramatists, essayists, encyclopedists, the scientific writers, the
philosophers, the critics and the poets, men and women, from Moliere to
de Stael, and even the translated French literature of Louisiana--all
are generously though compactly treated."--_Brooklyn Daily Eagle_,
Brooklyn, N. Y.

"The work is exceedingly interesting, and gives a very faithful
illustration of French thought as set forth in the general literature of
the people. One cannot read the work without securing a fair and most
pleasant acquaintance with the eminent men and women who have given to
France a literature second to none, in many respects, of any nation. The
author shows himself both an admirer of French thought and thoroughly
conversant with it."--_Herald of Gospel Liberty_, Dayton, Ohio.


                    THE BEGINNINGS OF CIVILIZATION.

--The Beginnings of Civilization. By Prof. Chas. Woodward Hutson. Ideal
  Ed., cl., 60c. (20c)

"Beginnings of Civilization will be of great interest to Bible students,
especially in those portions which treat of countries in immediate
connection with Hebrew history."--_Christian World_, Dayton, O.


                          THE STORY OF BERYL.

Hutson. The Story of Beryl. By Prof. Hutson. Ideal Ed. Paper, _15c._,
  cl., 35c. (10c)

"The 'Story of Beryl' is written in the author's usual graceful style.
The characters are true to nature, the incidents told in pure English,
and one can not help being interested in the story."--_Morning Star_,
Boston.


                        OUT OF A BESIEGED CITY.

--Out of a Besieged City. By Prof. Hutson. Paper, _10c._, cloth, 25c.
  (6c)

"Out of a Besieged City affords one the most excellent idea of the
events of the stirring times of the Revolution."--_Central Baptist_, St.
Louis.


                     Alden's "New" Ideal Book Case.

Alden's Ideal Revolving Book-Case, No. 3. Has four shelves, adjustable,
  giving 136 inches of shelf room; size of case, 19 inches wide, 12
  inches deep, 40 inches high, or four feet, including the base, Is made
  of perfectly kiln-dried cherry birch, with birds-eye maple panels;
  hand carved; built on ingenious but simple interlocking principles,
  doing away, mainly, with screws, nails or glue; may be knocked down
  and set up again in five minutes; price $10.00 at store.

No. 4, similar to No. 3, but without the birds-eye panels, and "solid"
  instead of "knock down;" price $8.00 at store.

Alden's "New" Ideal Revolving Book Case, above described, ready May 1,
1889, is a great improvement upon the styles heretofore sold. The new is
supported from the top instead of at the base, as formerly, thus
standing firmer and revolving more freely; the "knock-down" feature of
No. 3 is a triumph of mechanical ingenuity; the workmanship and the
material used, in both styles, are a great advance on those formerly
sold--this is high praise, indeed, considering the delightful
satisfaction the book cases have given in the past, but our patrons will
find our estimate just; this, we think, comes very near to being a
"perfect" book case!


                           A Grand Old Roman.

Antoninus, Marcus Aurelius. The Thoughts of, translated by George Long,
  with a sketch of his Life and a view of his Philosophy. Ideal Edition,
  cloth. 30c. (7c)

"This is a wonderfully interesting book. The ancient stoical philosophy
receives, in this great and gentle-minded Roman Emperor, its noblest
expression."--_Advance_, Chicago.


                        The Earth for 25 Cents!

Alden's Handy Atlas of the World. 138 colored maps, diagrams, tables,
  etc. Price, 30c. (8c);

"I think so much intrinsically valuable information was never before
compressed into so small a space. An Atlas and a Gazetteer for 25
cents!"--Benson J. Lossing, LL.D., Dover Plains, N. Y.


                         Great Oriental Poems.

Arnold. Light of Asia, by Edwin Arnold, cloth, 30c. (7c)

--Indian Song of Songs, by Edwin Arnold, cloth, 25c. (6c)

--Pearls of the Faith, by Edwin Arnold, cloth, 25c. (6c)

"No man, since the days of Sir William Jones, has so deeply drunk at the
founts of Indian learning, or so well interpreted its meaning to the
Occidental mind as has Edwin Arnold. The 'Pearls of the Faith,' contains
some of the finest poetry, in thought and expression, of recent
times."--_Methodist Magazine_, Toronto.


                            Bacon and Locke.

Bacon's Essays. With notes of Devey. Elzevir Ed., cloth, 30c. (10c)

Bacon's Essays, and Locke on the Understanding, in one vol. half Russia,
  45c. (15c)

"'Bacon's Essays' are a part of the mental furniture of nearly all
reading people. They can be read now with as much profit as when they
were first written."--_Observer_, New York.

"If Bacon first discovered the rules by which knowledge is improved,
Locke has most contributed to make mankind at large observe
them."--Mackintosh.


                   A Poem that Ranks with the Iliad.

Crawford. The Kalevala. The National Epic Poem of the Finlanders.
  Translated into English Verse, by Dr. John Martin Crawford. In two
  volumes, small octavo, Small Pica type, leaded, cloth, gilt top, $2.25
  (75c); half Morocco, $2.75 (85c); in one volume cl., gilt top, $1.70
  (60c)

This is the estimate put upon the Kalevala by such an eminent authority
as Max Müller.

"Certainly the 'Kalevala' as it stands, is one of the World's great
poems. * * Of its antiquity there is no doubt. It is thoroughly pagan
from beginning to end. * * All the characteristics of a splendid antique
civilization are mirrored in this marvelous poem, and Mr. Crawford's
admirable translation should make the wonderful heroes of Suomi song as
familiar if not as dear to our people as the heroes of the great Ionian
epics."--_Evening Telegraphy_, Philadelphia, Pa.


                       Curious Myths and Legends,

Baring-Gould. Curious Myths of the Middle Ages. By S. Baring-Gould.
  Elzevir Ed., cloth, 40c. (15c)

--Legends of the Patriarchs and Prophets. By S. Baring-Gould. Elzevir
  Ed., cloth, 50c. (15c)

"'Curious Myths' will be found of great assistance to intelligent
persons generally who are often puzzled about the Wandering Jew, William
Tell, and other distinguished characters who become the more
unsubstantial the nearer we get to them."--_Daily Eagle_, Brooklyn, N.
Y.


                        Carlyle's Popular Works.

Carlyle. Heroes, Hero Worship and the Heroic in History. By Thomas
  Carlyle. Ideal edition Brevier type; cloth, 30c. (11c)

--Popular Works French Revolution, Elzevir Edition. Brevier type,
  leaded, 2 volumes, cloth $1.00 (30c) Past and Present, 12mo, cloth,
  40c. (10c)

"The works of Thomas Carlyle have become classic. A library would be
scarcely complete without something from his pen."--_Evangelist_, St.
Louis.


                        Miracles Daily Wrought!

Carter. Divine Healing; or, The Atonement for Sin and Sickness. By Capt.
  R. Kelso Carter. Small quarto. Small Pica type, paper, _25c._ (10c),
  cloth, 60c. (20c)

The best exposition of the "Faith Cure." The author claims that the
atonement of Christ was designed to give health to the body as well as
to the soul.

"Whatsoever the reader may think of the subject discussed in the work,
he will certainly find it the most readable, reasonable, and reliable
compend of this interesting topic."--_Friends' Expositor_, Toronto, Ont.


                         A Literary Gold Mine.

Franklin Literary Nuggets, The. Size 4-1/2 x 6 inches, about 200 pages
  each. Fine cloth binding, gilt tops. Per volume, 30c. (8c)

1. The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin.

2. The Castle of Otranto. By Horace Walpole.

3. My Ten Years' Imprisonment. By Silvio Pellico.

4. Lessing's Nathan the Wise.

5 and 6. White's Natural History of Selborne, 2 vols.

7. Izaak Walton's Complete Angler.

8. Addison and Steele's Sir Roger de Coverley.

9. Herodotus' Egypt and Scythia.

10. Marco Polo's Voyages and Travels.

11. Sir Thomas Brown's Religio Medici.

Beautiful little volumes which need only to be seen to be admired. Note
the extremely low price. At these rates really choice literature is
cheaper than the "trash" which in low-priced form is largely circulated.


                       The Dickens!--New Edition,
                            $3.00 Post-paid!

Dickens. The Works of Charles Dickens' "Boz" Edition, in six vols.,
  small 8vo, good type, with numerous illus., well printed on fair
  paper, cl., $3.00 (75c)

               List of the Vols.--Over 130 Illustrations.

1. Dombey and Son. Old Curiosity Shop. Hard Times.

2. Copperfield. Christmas Stories. Tale of Two Cities. Uncommercial
  Traveler.

3. Nicholas Nickleby. Martin Chuzzlewit. American Notes.

4. Mutual Friend. Little Dorrit. Reprinted. Edwin Drood.

5. Pickwick Papers. Barnaby Rudge. Sketches by Boz.

6. Oliver Twist. Great Expectations. Bleak House. Pictures from Italy.

So many thousands of our book buying patrons seem to want a _cheap_
Dickens that I concluded to produce this, incomparably the cheapest
edition ever printed! And quite a respectable edition it is,
too--printed from the _same plates_ as Appleton's "Popular Library
Edition," which is still on their catalogue at $10.00! You may have a
sample volume (name at least four, and your order of preference) for 45
cents, postpaid, to be returned if not wanted. Discounts to Club Agents
liberal. Order a sample and sell a dozen--or a hundred--sets!

"The set of 'Boz' Dickens which I ordered from you came yesterday, and I
assure you of my delight at possessing such a literary treasure for such
a small expenditure of money."--Mrs. J. T. Stephenson, Griffin, Ga.


           The Immortal--_A Great Novel! A Scorching Satire!_

Daudet. The Immortal. By Alphonse Daudet. 12mo, cloth, 60c. (20c)

"Daudet is undoubtedly a genius. He knows the power of words, and uses
it with skill. The simplest scenes fairly thrill with life. His noble
characters move with that charm that is so attractive, and his ignoble
characters with that meanness that is so detestable. When he touches
with that genuine simplicity any bewitching look of nature, he makes it
so powerful that it remains in the memory long afterwards. Whether this
last novel of the great Frenchman is aimed or not at the individual
members of the Academy, we do not know, but certainly he punctures the
big bubble of the Academy itself and lets out a great deal of the gas;
not in one place or two, but in a hundred. But we sincerely wish this
literary French genius would employ his pen with less objection in some
instances, or, in other words, that he would be more chaste and refined.
If this is a study of social life, as he claims in his dedication, then
evidently what Paris needs is not so much study, but reform."--_Zion's
Herald_, Boston.


                  Delightful Stories for Young Folks.

*Church, Alfred J. Stories from the Classics, Each 1 vol., 12mo, cloth,
  $1.50, reduced to 75c. (25c)

Stories from Homer,

Stories of Virgil,

Stories from the Greek Tragedians,

Roman Life in the Days of Cicero,

Stories from Livy,

Stories of the Persian War from Herodotus,

Two Thousand Years Ago; or the Adventures of a Roman Boy,

Stories from Herodotus,

Here are eight books one can commend most heartily, and with a good
conscience. They are not only charming, but they are educating, in the
truest sense. They delight the young folks, and parents and teachers are
pleased to know the fact. It is a positive pleasure to be able to
present these exquisite old tales in such excellent form, at a cost so
greatly reduced.


                     Epictetus, Stoic Philosopher.

Epictetus, The Teachings of, translated with notes. Ideal edition. 210
  pp., cloth, 30c. (10c)

The Emerson of the Ancients! No philosopher of antiquity, save possibly
Plato and Aristotle, is more quoted, or more revered. It is really a
good book for _every_ library. This pretty and convenient Ideal edition
is just the dress for such a book.

Contains the Encheiridion, selections from the Dissertations and
Fragments, an introduction and helpful notes. Deserves wide circulation.

"The book of Epictetus, the noblest of the Stoics."--_St. Augustine._


                        Drummond's Natural Law.

Drummond: Natural Law in the Spiritual World. New Edition, cloth, 12mo,
  50c. (15c)

"Almost a revelation."--_Christian Union._ "Grand reading for the
clergy."--Bishop Coxe. "A most original and ingenious book, instructive
and suggestive in the highest degree."--_Nonconformist._ "One of those
rare books which find a new point of view from which old things
themselves become new."--_Chicago Standard._ "Too much cannot be said in
praise of it, and those who fail to read it will suffer a serious
loss."--_The Churchman._ "In Drummond's book we have none of the
nonsense of the new theology, but the old theology splendidly illumined
by the newest scientific knowledge."--Dr. Henson, Chicago.


                         A Romance of Geology.

Dawson. The Story of the Earth and Man. By Sir John W. Dawson. Small
  quarto, cloth, illust., price reduced from $1.50 to 50c. (20c) Cheap
  edition in paper, without illust., _15c._ (4c)

"This veteran scientist is as enthusiastic and hard-working as a boy,
and whatever he writes is stamped with the highest authority. It gives
us pleasure to commend this book."--_Morning Star_, Boston.

"This book has been universally commended as containing the substance of
knowledge about the evolution of earth and man, though the author can
hardly be called an evolutionist. This republication is in cheap form
and places a very valuable work in the hands of any one who desires to
read it."--_World_, Omaha.


                         Peerless Old Boswell!

Boswell's Life of Johnson. Croker's Edition, in 4 volumes, large 12mo,
  cloth, $2.75 ($1.25)

"The richest dictionary of wit and wisdom any language can boast of.
Enlarged and illuminated by the researches and sagacious running
criticism of Mr. Croker, it is, without doubt--excepting a few immortal
monuments of creative genius--that book which would be most prized in
other days and countries by the students of 'us and our
history.'"--_London Quarterly Review._

"We cannot believe that any subsequent improvement will ever be made
upon this edition; and we have no doubt that it will excite the
curiosity and reward the attention of the reading world."--_North Am.
Review._


                 Evolution from a Christian Standpoint.

Hark. The Unity of the Truth, in Christianity and Evolution. By J. Max
  Hark D.D. 12 mo, 293 pages. Small Pica type, leaded, cloth, gilt top,
  90c. (40c)

"A thoughtful and scholarly work, written in the interest of persons who
are bewildered by the teaching of unbelieving
evolutionists."--_Christian Standard_, Cincinnati, O.

"No one can be more sure and clear than Dr. Hark, that whatever may
hereafter come to be the final, clearly and indisputably settled results
of scientific examination, they will be found to be in perfect
accordance with the equally carefully ascertained teachings of the
Christian revelation. In that firm faith we may all agree and encourage
science to the most diligent examination, only bidding it not to be too
sure of its conclusions until the evidence is complete."--_The
Lutheran_, Philadelphia, Pa.


                            Evolution Again.
            "_Rich, delicate, robust._" R. S. Storrs, D. D.

Parker. The Spirit of Beauty. Essays, scientific and æsthetic, by Prof.
  Henry W. Parker; large 12mo, cloth, gilt top, 85c. (25c)

"I have been delighted, instructed and morally animated by The Spirit of
Beauty. It gives rich, delicate and robust expression to a various
knowledge, as well as to fine, devout and far-reaching thought. I have
not for long taken up a book which has interested me so immediately, or
refreshed me so abundantly."--Rev. R. S. Storrs, D.D.

"Every page shows the author's warm sympathy alike with what is best in
modern scientific and Christian thought--his enthusiasm for nature, for
humanity and for God."--_The Advance_, Chicago, Ill.

"It is not the 'bigoted' theologian who rises this time in the higher
interests of humanity, but the trained and well-informed scientist. It
is an arrow from within the fort, and its destructive power is all the
greater because the bowman himself takes 'some stock in Darwin's Origin
of Species.' The fact that the bow has been bent not directly for the
purpose of rescuing religion, but for the rescue of beauty and art and
morality and civilization from the toils of a false science, will give
the book a hearing where the argument from religious grounds would have
none. We know of no better book to be placed into the hands of the
college student or young doctor or lawyer whose casual reading or not
wholly mature thinking has infected him with agnostic or Spencerian
views."--_The Lutheran_, Philadelphia, Pa.


                     Library of Universal History.

Library of Universal History. 4 vols., 12 mo, cloth, gilt top. Each
  $1.50, reduced to $1.10 (40c) The set of 4 vols. $3.75 (85c)

1. Ancient History. By George Rawlinson, M.A.

2. Mediæval History. By George T. Stokes, D.D.

3. Modern History. By Arthur St. Geo. Patton.

4. Geological History. By Edw. Hull, LL.D.

An extremely valuable series. Volume I. covers the period from the
creation of the world to the fall of Rome; Volume II. treats of the
Middle Ages; Volume III. comes down to the present time, and Volume IV.
forms a summary of the historical phase of the Science of Geology.
Excellent for students and for general readers.


                              Washington!
            _By Washington Irving. Irving's Complete Works._

Irving's Life of Washington. Illustrated Library Edition, in 4 volumes,
  small octavo, Long Primer type, including 108 fine illustrations,
  cloth, gilt tops, $2.50 (6Oc); half Morocco, $3.00 (75c) Popular
  Edition. In two vols., 12mo, cloth, $1.25 (35c); half Morocco, $1.75
  (60c)

Irving's Collected Works (complete except Washington), in 9 vols., half
  Morocco, marbled edges Price, $6.25 ($1.60). The same in 6 vols.,
  cloth, $4.50 (90c)

"Irving is an author every American child should early become acquainted
with and learn to love. His genial spirit, kindly humor, and pure style,
fit him eminently to become the literary model of our young folks, and
the worthy introduction to the further study of our
literature."--_School Journal_, Lancaster, Pa.


                      A Russian Historical Novel.

Gogol. Taras Bulba, By Nikolai Vassilievitch, translated by Jeremiah
  Curtin, cloth, 60c. (20c)

"The characters stand forth in bold relief against a dark and gloomy
background; they are like the figures of a Greek frieze in their Titanic
majesty. Pleasing, no one could call the novel; fascinating it must
prove to all. The story of the wars of the Cossacks and of their
desperate struggles to maintain their lawless freedom is among the
romances of history."--The _Golden Rule_, Boston, Mass.


                           The Woman's Story,
                       _By Twenty Famous Women._

Holloway. The Woman's Story, as told by twenty famous American women,
  whose names are appended. Edited by Laura C. Holloway, with a
  biographical sketch and a fine portrait of each author. Large 12mo,
  cloth, _$1.00_ (30c).  AGENTS WANTED.

Harriett Beecher Stowe.

Harriett Prescott Spofford.

Rebecca Harding Davis.

Edna Dean Proctor.

"Josiah Allen's Wife."

Nora Perry.

Augusta Evans Wilson.

Louise Chandler Moulton.

Celia Thaxter.

"Grace Greenwood."

Abba Gould Woolson.

Mary J. Holmes.

Margaret E. Sangster.

Oliver Thorne Miller.

Elizabeth W. Champney.

Julia C. R. Dorr.

Marion Harland.

Louisa May Alcott.

Ella Wheeler Wilcox.

Rose Terry Cooke.

"The volume is a worthy tribute to our American women of letters, and a
fair sample of our best fiction work. It is a book that will commend
itself to our patriotism, and to all lovers of our national
literature."--_Christian Evangelist_, St. Louis, Mo.

"It ought to prove one of the most profitable volumes the publisher has
made, for such a collection of admirable short stories seldom is found
within the covers of a single book. * * * A galaxy indeed of lustrous
stars. The book deserves to be printed with the highest art and to be
bound in morocco and gilt; but it appears with propriety in a form which
brings it within the reach of persons of moderate means. Such a dollar's
worth seldom can be secured by reading households."--_Christian
Intelligencer_, New York City.


                         The Koran in English.

Koran of Mohammed, The. Translated by George Sale. 12mo., cloth, 336
  pages, 60c. (20c)

By far the best translation of a book which has exerted a wonderful
influence in the past and which is now accepted as a sacred volume by
more than two hundred million people.


                   Bayard Taylor's Most Famous Book.

Taylor. Views Afoot; or Europe Seen with Knapsack and Staff. By Bayard
  Taylor. With two portraits and an introduction by N. P. Willis. 12mo,
  481 pages. Long Primer type, cloth, 60c. (20c)

"There are few smoother or more gracefully written books of travel than
Bayard Taylor's 'Views Afoot.' For two years he was a wayfaring
pedestrian, often reduced to a plate of soup and a crust, trudging along
in a dilapidated pair of shoes, but his spirits, health, and delightful
resources as a correspondent never failed. He saw Europe thoroughly for
$500 earned by the way, and came back to his country quite a famous
young man. His letters are good reading to-day. They present Europe from
the pedestrian side; and among many literary graces they have the
poetic. 'Views Afoot' is one of the new publications of John B. Alden,
the cheapness of whose books is a modern novelty. The volume is set in a
large, peculiarly distinct type, and has in all respects an attractive,
comfortable appearance."--_Commercial Gazette_, Cincinnati, O.


                Invaluable _For Home and Sunday School._

Pittenger. The Interwoven Gospels. The four histories of Jesus Christ
  blended into a complete and continuous narrative in the words of the
  Gospels. According to the American Revised Version of 1881. Compiled
  by Rev. William Pittenger. 12mo, cloth, with maps, 90c. (30c)

"The Interwoven Gospels is an exceedingly helpful and convenient
arrangement, based on a good plan, and well wrought."--Rev. Richard G.
Greene, East Orange, N. J.

"The advantage of such a book, both to a young reader and to a teacher
of New Testament history, in bringing the gospel narratives into their
proper relations, and in giving a clear mental view of the times and
seasons to which events belong, must be apparent."--_The Interior_,
Chicago, Ill.

"The work is well done, and the little book will be welcome aid to many
in the study of the New Testament."--_The Examiner_, N. Y. City.


   Shakespeare. _Ideal Form! Ideal Price! Ideal Type! Ideal Binding!_

Shakespeare. The Ideal Shakespeare. The text complete in 12 volumes,
  Long Primer type, fine heavy paper, bound in fine cloth, gilt tops,
  price $6.00 ($2.50); half Morocco, $7.20 ($2.50); The same, on lighter
  paper bound in 6 vols., cloth, $3.00 ($1.40) An extra vol., giving
  glossary, concordance, etc., cloth, 50c. (15c); half Morocco, 60c.
  (20c) See Elzevir Library for plays at _7 cts._ each, 20 for $1.00.

"For a handy-volume series, agreeable to the eye and convenient we
commend Mr. Alden's publication, and the reasonable price should
certainly insure its success."--_The Bookmart_, New York.

"Your books came duly to hand. I am very much pleased with all their
make-up, binding and contents, and especially with their marvelously low
price. Only they cheat a body out of work--for Bayard Taylor and Beecher
kept me from sermonizing and the Woman's Story kept my wife from sewing
all the afternoon."--Rev. P. C. Croll, Schuylkill Haven, Pa.

"I have books from a majority of the principal publishing firms in the
U.S., and I can assure all, that your work is always _equal and
generally superior_ to any of them, notwithstanding your marvelous
prices."--A. L. Campbell, Silver Creek, Ky.


           Popular Medical Cyclopedia _For Use in The Home._

Lankester. Family Medical Guide. Edited by Edwin Lankester, M.D.,
  F.R.S., written by distinguished members of the Royal College of
  Physicians and Surgeons, London. American edition, revised and
  enlarged; large 8vo, 500 pages; price in cloth $4.00, reduced to
  _$1.00._ (35c)

"In this large work is comprised all possible self-aid in the treatment
of diseases, accidents, emergencies, etc."--_Brooklyn Eagle._

"It is, in fine, the best book of the kind ever published. No family
should be without it."--_Charleston Daily News and Courier._


  Literary Portraits. _Interesting Biography. Choice Select Readings._

Literary Portraits. Biographical and critical studies of contemporary
  and classic authors, with selections from their writings. 26 portraits
  and other illustrations. Reprinted from "Literature," Alden's
  illustrated weekly magazine. 464 pages, small quarto, cloth, 90c.
  (30c)

Literary Portraits. Second Series. Uniform in all respects with First
  Series in style and price.

"An interesting volume, containing sketches and portraits of General Lew
Wallace and his wife, Mark Twain, Octave Thanet, Charles Reade, Maurice
Thompson, Celia Thaxter, Robert Louis Stevenson, Frances E. Willard,
Paul H. Hayne, Emerson, Thackeray, Joel Chandler Harris, and other
literary people. The book is well printed and bound, and, like all of
Mr. Alden's publications, is sold at an astonishingly low price. Writers
will find it of special interest."--_The Writer_, Boston, Mass.


                         400 Famous Americans.

Lossing. Eminent Americans. By Benson J. Lossing, LL.D. 12mo, cl., 90c.
  (25c); half Mco., $1.10 (35c)

"The work can hardly be overrated in importance. The faces of the most
eminent men and women shine forth from its pages, and the events of
their lives are illustrated by the author in the happiest possible
manner. The American youth who owns the work may be justly
envied."--_Herald of Gospel Liberty_, Dayton, O.


                        Wonders of the Heavens.

Mitchel. Planetary and Stellar Worlds. By Gen. O. M. Mitchel. Small
  quarto, Small Pica type. Price reduced from $1.50; paper, _15c._,
  cloth, 35c. (7c)

"Whoever opens this book will be surprised to find how little of the
technical there is in it, how popular it is in style, and plain in its
statement of astronomical facts. It is one of the most brilliant and
fascinating expositions of the science of the stars we have ever seen.
While it cannot fail to interest the special student of the noble
science of astronomy, its chief value, we judge, will consist in its
charming adaptation to the tastes of the general reader."--_Guardian_,
Philadelphia.


                     "The Reader's Pulse Tingles."

Pittenger. A History of the great Raid and Locomotive Chase in Georgia
  in 1862. By William Pittenger. New edition, large 8vo, illustrated,
  cloth, _$1.50_ (60c)

--The same, cheap ed., the story complete but omitting documents, paper,
  _40c_; cloth, _75c._

"The realism of the author reminds one of Tolstoi and his military
pictures in the forms of both history and romance."--_The Eagle_,
Brooklyn.

"So thrillingly and graphically told that the reader's pulses tingle as
his fancy accompanies this wild expedition."--_The Courier_, Buffalo, N.
Y.


                  Robert Elsmere. _Cheaper! Cheaper!_

Ward. Robert Elsmere. By Mrs. Humphry Ward. Large 12 mo, cloth, 40c.
  (15c)

--Gladstone's Famous Essay on "Robert Elsmere and the Battle of Belief."
  Large type, complete, _3c._

"A remarkable book--a work of true genius."--_New York Tribune._

"It will attract the lovers of the best literature."--_Literary World._

"One of the strongest works of fiction that have appeared in England
since George Eliot."--_Critic._

"Nothing, indeed, approaching it has appeared in its particular
department since the last work of George Eliot."--_Churchman._


                  Nature, Picturesque--Nature, Human.

Thompson. A Fortnight of Folly. By Maurice Thompson. Cloth. _50c._ (20c)

--Sylvan Secrets in Bird-Songs and Books. By Maurice Thompson. Ideal
  Ed., cloth, _60c._ (25c)

"The 'Fortnight' has no sleepiness, even for the drowsy-inclined eyes of
a summer tourist."--_National Republican_, Washington, D. C.

"All lovers of candor and keen air and sunshine must be charmed with
Maurice Thompson's little book of essays, entitled 'Sylvan Secrets.' The
author is above all things a poet, and his science breaks into poetry at
every turn."--_The Critic_, N. Y. City.

"Mr. Thompson is a genuine poet. He discloses secrets in woods, sea and
skies of which we never dreamed. Songs of birds and whispering winds
have new meanings as he listens to them. There are no dull pages in this
book."--_Lutheran Observer_, Philadelphia, Pa.


                     Famous Statesmen of the World.

International Statesman Series. Biographies of great social and
  political leaders. Edited by Lloyd C. Sanders. Cloth, per vol., 60c.
  (15c)

1. Lord Beaconsfield. By T. E. Kebbel.

2. Viscount Palmerston. By Lloyd C. Sanders.

3. Prince Metternich. By G. B. Malleson.

4. O'Connell. By J. A. Hamilton.

5. Lord Bolingbroke. By Arthur Hassall.

6. Sir Robert Peel. By F. C. Montague.

A very interesting and important series of biographies of men who have
been influential in the social and political history of the world.


                      A Great Popular Dictionary.

*Nuttall's Standard Dictionary of the English Language. A new
  illustrated edition; revised, extended, and improved throughout, by
  Rev. James Wood, Edinburgh. 100,000 references and all the new words.
  The handiest lexicon in the world. In large crown 8vo, 832 pp., cloth,
  $1.50, reduced to 90c. (15c) With patent cut-in index, 20 cents extra.

"My own private library and the two churches in my charge are the richer
for your praiseworthy attempts to bring good books within the reach of
ordinary pocket books."--Rev. William H. Bulkley, Stepney Depot, Ct.


                         Wonders of the World.

*Platt. World's Cyclopedia of Wonders and Curiosities. Compiled by I.
  Platt, D.D.; illustrated, nearly 1,000 pages. Large, 8vo, price $3.00,
  reduced to $1.60 (35c)

"The package of books was duly received, and must say that we are highly
pleased with the same. In fact, it is one of the best investments we
ever made."--The Globe Oil Co., Cleveland, Ohio.


                       The Popular Wallace Books.

Wallace. Ben Hur: A Tale of the Christ. By General Lew Wallace. 12 mo,
  cloth, _$1.50_. For $1.85 I will send Ben Hur and The Repose in Egypt,
  or for _$1.60_ Ben Hur and The Land of the Pueblos, or for _$2.60_ all
  three books.

"A real life-like picture of the age in which Jesus lived and died. The
design of the author is admirably executed, and the fidelity with which
he has personated and illustrated the greatest life-history of earth
will win for him more enduring fame than he won on the battle-field of
our late civil war."--_Lutheran Observer_, Philadelphia, Pa.


                           An Orient Medley.

Wallace. The Repose in Egypt: A Medley. By Susan E. Wallace. Finely
  illustrated. Large 12mo, cloth, _$1.00_ (40c)

"Mrs. Wallace has a sense of humor, and her geniality sparkles and plays
over pyramid, sphinx, Colossus and Nile scenery in a way that relieves
her descriptions of a thousand times told tale of dullness or
repetition. Nothing short of a vigorous writer could do that. The reader
is carried along in the charming society of the 'Antiquary,' the
'Historian,' 'Thalia,' so that one feels quite of the party. * * *
Romance and philosophy enter entertainingly into this 'medley,' which is
not altogether without continuity, and the interest is sustained to the
end."--_Literary Bureau_, Washington, D.C.


                           A Mysterious Land.

--The Land of the Pueblos. By Susan E. Wallace. 12mo, cloth, finely
  illust. Price _75c._ (35c)

--*The Fair God. A Tale of the Conquest of Mexico, by Gen. Lew Wallace.
  Large 12mo, cloth, $1.50, reduced to $1.25 (20c)

"Mrs. Wallace fascinates the reader in two ways: The story itself is one
of illimitable interest, and it is charmingly told from beginning to
end. The style is of the matter. Mrs. Wallace has steeped her mind in
the glory of these wonderful lands--the glory of their traditions, the
glory of their scenery--and the touch of her imagination, in its
delicate appreciations, its dreamy hints, its allusiveness, its pathetic
sympathies, imparts a constant glow to her pages, and makes vivid and
life-like a narrative of those far western and old-time countries and
peoples."--_Apostolic Guide_, Cincinnati.

--*Ginevra; or, the Tale of the Old Oak Chest. By Susan E. Wallace. 4to.
  boards, in a fine chromo cover, $1.25, reduced to 85c. (20c)

"Mrs. Wallace is one of the most fluent and fascinating writers in this
country. Her descriptive powers are simply marvelous."--_Express_,
Easton.


                     A Charming Historical Romance.

Ware. Zenobia; or, the Fall of Palmyra. By William Ware. Paper, _10c._;
  cloth, 30c. (10c)

"It is an historical romance. The scene, the characters, and the
historical events are finely selected; for they abound with striking
images and associations. It is not a work of an ordinary character. It
is the production of a thoughtful, able, imaginative, and, above all, a
pure and right-minded author, of clear thought and sound
sense."--Andrews Norton.

"I enclose cheque. You are doing noble work for the lovers of good
books, and it is only because everybody does not know you that you do
not supply everybody with books."--S. A. Barnes, President Teacher's
Association, Spring Garden, Fla.


                     Popular Religious Literature.

Geikie. The Holy Land and the Bible. A Book of Scripture Illustrations
  gathered in Palestine. By Cunningham Geikie, D.D. Beautifully printed
  from Small Pica type, with a map and over 200 fine illustrations, from
  drawings by the celebrated American artists, Harry Fenn and J. D.
  Woodward. In 2 vols., small quarto, cloth, $2.00 (65c); elegantly
  bound in half Morocco, $2.75 ($1.00)

"Dr. Geikie's readers will follow him through Palestine, Bible in hand,
with eager interest and constant delight."--_Literary World_, Boston.

"We congratulate Sunday-school workers that the best manual for
practical use on the Holy Land is now placed before them at a
wonderfully low price, and yet, print, binding, and illustrations are of
the highest order."--_Maine S. S. Reporter._


                         THE BIBLE ILLUMINATED.

--Hours with the Bible. By Cunningham Geikie, D.D. In 6 vols., 12mo,
  illustrated. I. Creation to Patriarchs: II. Moses to Judges: III.
  Samson to Solomon: IV. Rehoboam to Hezekiah: V. Manasseh to Zedekiah:
  VI. Exile to Malachi. Per vol. cloth, 50c. (20c); half Mco., 65c.
  (25c); per set, cloth, $2.75 (90c); half Morocco, $3.50 ($1.20) Index
  vol. including Texts of the Bible Illustrated; cloth, 30c. (10c); half
  Mco., 40c. (11c)

"Taken altogether, we know no work of like design that can be commended
with so little qualification. For the average _reader there is nothing
that compares to it_."--_Christian Evangelist_, St. Louis.

"Fills a place which no commentary can occupy, as it brings to bear upon
the Biblical record a vast amount of information--geographical,
historical, scientific--not available in an ordinary commentary."--_The
Guardian_, Philadelphia.


                        THE BEST LIFE OF CHRIST.

--Life and Words of Christ. By Cunningham Geikie. 12mo, cl., _45c._
  (15c); hf. Mco., _60c._ (20c)

"It breathes the spirit of true faith in Christ. I rejoice at such a
magnificent creation."--Dr. Delitzsch.


                         A BOOK FOR YOUNG MEN.

--Entering on Life. By Cunningham Geikie. A Book for Young Men. 12mo,
  cloth, _40c._ (15c)

"We earnestly recommend young men to read what has been to ourselves a
truly delightful work."--Dean Alford.

"When such a man as the wise and gentle Dean Alford recommends a book,
all is said, and said as only a few can say it. Every parent, every
teacher, every friend of the race, every believer in things of good
repute, must echo his convictions, and join with him in bearing witness
to the good sense, the exquisite fancy, the pathos, piety, and sound
moral reasoning that illuminate every page."--_The Week_, Toronto.


                   The Confessions of St. Augustine.

St. Augustine, Confessions of. Translated by E. D. Pusey, D.D. Ideal
  Edition, cloth. 60c. (16c)

"No one mind has ever made such an impression on Christian thought. No
one can hesitate to acknowledge the depth of his spiritual conviction
and the strength, solidity, and penetration with which he handled the
most difficult questions, and wrought all the elements of his
experience, and his profound scriptural knowledge, into a great
system."--John Tulloch, Principal of St. Andrew's University.


                     Macaulay. Prescott. Rawlinson.

*Macaulay's England. 5 vols., 12mo, cloth, $5.00, reduced to $2.00 (40c)
  The same half Russia, $7.50 reduced to $3.50 (60c)

Macaulay's Essays. On Bacon, Hastings, and Pitt: Ideal Ed., cloth, 35c.
  (8c)

"Macaulay's essays are remarkable for their brilliant rhetorical power,
their splendid tone of coloring and their affluence of illustration. He
excels in the delineation of historical characters and in the art of
carrying his readers into a distant period and reproducing the past with
the distinctness of the present."--Geo. S. Hillard.

"Both his turn of mind and style of writing are peculiar, and exhibit a
combination rarely if ever before witnessed in modern literature. He is
deeply learned in ancient and modern lore; he is eminently dramatic and
pictorial; alternately speaks poetry to the soul and pictures to the
eye. His learning is prodigious; in many of his writings there are
reflections, equally just and original, which were never surpassed in
the philosophy of history."--Sir Archibald Allison.


                        Spain in its Golden Age.

Prescott. Ferdinand and Isabella. By Wm. H. Prescott. Illustrated
  Library Edition. In two vols small octavo, $1.25 (35c) Popular
  edition, without illustrations, one vol., 85c. (20c)

--Prescott's Biographical and Critical Miscellanies. Ideal Edition, cl.,
  40c. (15c); hf Mco., 55c. (20c)

"Every one who reads at all should read Prescott."--_The Presbyterian_,
Philadelphia, Pa.

"Prescott was a prince among historians."--_Christian Secretary_,
Hartford, Ct.

"Mr. Prescott ranks among the most successful historical writers of all
times."--_Sunday Morning Herald_, Minneapolis, Minn.


                  Rawlinson's Great Historical Works.

Rawlinson. Seven Great Monarchies. By George Rawlinson. 3 vols., 12mo,
  with many hundred illustrations and maps. Cloth, gilt tops, $2.75
  (80c)

"This edition includes all the maps, notes and illustrations of the
edition for which $18 has heretofore been charged, and the illustrations
are actually superior to those of the $18 edition."--_Oregonian_,
Portland, Oregon.

--Rawlinson's History of Ancient Egypt. With Several Hundred
  Illustrations, in two large 12mo vols., cloth, gilt tops. Price of the
  set reduced from $6.00 to $1.50 (50c)

"He that would have the best History of Egypt will choose Rawlinson's,
and he that would have the cheapest will buy Alden's. This most valuable
work, an almost exhaustive treatise on all that pertains to Egypt, could
not formerly be bought for less than $6.00, but is here offered,
profusely illustrated, and in Mr. Alden's excellent style of
workmanship, at the exceedingly low price of $1.50."--_Guardian_,
Philadelphia.

--Historical Evidences. By Rawlinson. 12mo, cloth, gilt top, 60c. (20c)

--Egypt and Babylon from Sacred and Profane Sources. By Rawlinson, cl.,
  gilt top, 50c. (15c)

--Religions of the Ancient World. By Rawlinson. 12mo, cloth, gilt top,
  50c. (15c)

"Mr. Rawlinson is doubtless the best modern authority in Biblical
researches as sources of evidence of the credibility of the Scripture
records. He seems to have devoted his life to this department of study,
and to him the world is greatly indebted therefor."--_Journal and
Messenger_, Cincinnati, O.


                         Kingdoms of the World.

*Kingdoms of the World. Popular Histories, brought down to the present
  time. Each in one vol., 8vo. cloth, $2.00, reduced to $1.25 (20c)

Italy, By J. S. C. Abbott.

Russia, By J. S. C. Abbott.

Austria, By J. S. C. Abbott.

Prussia. By J. S. C. Abbott.

Turkey. By Edson L. Clark.

Egypt. By J. C. McCoan.

Germany. By Baring-Gould.

A series of volumes that are justly held in high estimation; now reduced
in price nearly one-half, they ought to secure wide circulation.

"The books received. It is a never-ceasing wonder how such fine editions
can be supplied in exchange for the very small sum you ask for
them."--S. B. Walker, Castle Rock, Colo.

"The book ordered from you was a pleasant surprise to me, in type,
binding and general appearance. Will send you another and larger order
soon."--A. R. Read, Principal of Schools, Ebensburg, Pa.


                          Picturesque America!

*Williams. America Illustrated. Edited by J. David Williams. 100 fine
  wood-cuts. Quarto, cloth, gilt edges, printed on fine tinted paper,
  $2.50 reduced to $1.40 (25c)

The grandeur and vastness of our mountains, the beautiful scenery of
many of our rivers, the magnificence of our great waterfalls--all
present a field for the artist, who has made excellent use of the same.
The descriptive matter is also very interesting as well as instructive.
Printing and binding are very fine. An excellent presentation volume and
an ornament to any parlor or library. The price is extremely low.


                     Great Novels, Amazingly Cheap!

Bronte. Jane Eyre. By Charlotte Bronte, 12mo, cloth, 3Oc. (6c)

Charles. The Schonberg-Cotta Family. Small quarto. Paper _15c._ (7c);
  cloth, 30c. (10c)

Cooper. The Last of the Mohicans. By J. Fenimore Cooper. 12mo, cloth,
  35c. (10c)

Cummins. The Lamplighter. A Novel, by Maria S. Cummins. New Edition.
  Cloth, _50c._ (20c)

De Stael. Corinne. A Novel. By Madam De Stael, 12mo, cloth, 30c. (9c)

Ebers. Uarda, A Romance of Ancient Egypt. By George Ebers, 12mo, cloth,
  3Oc. (7c)

Eliot, George: Silas Marner. Small Pica type, small quarto, paper _10c._
  (4c); cloth, 25c. (7c)

--Romola. 12mo, cloth, 35c. (7c)

Goldsmith. Vicar of Wakefield: By Oliver Goldsmith. Ideal Edition.
  Cloth, 30c. (11c)

Haggard. King Solomon's Mines. By H. Rider Haggard. Paper _5c._, cloth,
  20c. (4c)

Hughes. Tom Brown at Rugby. By Thomas Hughes. Paper, _10c._ cloth, 25c.
  (7c)

Johnson. Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia. By Samuel Johnson. Ideal
  Edition, cloth, 25c. (7c)

Kingsley. Hypatia: A Novel. By Charles Kingsley. 12mo, cloth, 40c. (15c)

Reade. A Good Fight. By Chas. Reade, 12mo, cloth, 30c. (6c)

St. Pierre. Paul and Virginia. By Bernadin St Pierre. Ideal Ed., cl.,
  30c. (12c)

Stevenson. The Merry Men and Other Tales. By R. L. Stevenson. 12mo,
  cloth, 30c. (8c)

--Prince Otto; A Romance. By R. L. Stevenson. Paper, _5c._; cloth, 20c.
  (4c)

Stretton. Bede's Charity: A Novel, by Hesba Stretton. 12mo, cloth, 30c.
  (10c)

"I cannot find language to express my surprise and delight at the
quality of your books, and then the prices are really nominal compared
with the prices I have been paying for similar books. I shall order from
you as fast as my means will allow, until I fill my library."--Annie
Kelly, New Switzerland, Ga.

"Your prices are very tempting, and all the books that I have heretofore
gotten of you more than fulfilled my expectations."--Lewis M. Ayer,
Anderson, S. C.


                           The Gospel Story.

Pittenger. The Interwoven Gospels. The four histories of Jesus Christ
  blended into a complete and continuous narrative in the words of the
  Gospels. According to the American Revised Version of 1881. Compiled
  by Rev. William Pittenger. 12mo, cloth, with maps, 90c. (30c)

In this ingenious work the four biographies of Christ are given in the
language of the Gospels, but so arranged and blended as to form one
continuous narrative. When known, the period and place at which the
events described occurred are noted. Where the Evangelists have given
more than one account, the fullest one, or the one which best harmonized
with the preceding subject, has been taken and the peculiarities of the
others interwoven therewith.

"The work is well done, and will be welcome aid to many in the study of
the New Testament."--_The Examiner_, N. Y. City.

"Mr. Pittenger has done his work skillfully and the book cannot but
prove helpful to the Bible student."--_Witness_, Montreal.

"It is a useful and important work for Sunday-Schools and Bible classes
engaged in the study of the Word."--_Western Christian Advocate_,
Cincinnati.

"The Interwoven Gospels is an exceedingly helpful and convenient
arrangement, based on a good plan, and well wrought."--Rev. Richard G.
Greene, East Orange, N. J.

"The work supplies an arrangement that most readers feel the need of,
for obvious reasons, and is very useful as an introduction to study of
the New Testament."--_The Globe_, Boston.

"The advantage of such a book, both to a young reader and to a teacher
of New Testament history, in bringing the gospel narratives into their
proper relations, and in giving a clear mental view of the times and
seasons to which events belong, must be apparent,"--_The Interior_,
Chicago, Ill.

"The author has made the Gospels (in the language of the Gospels) an
easy and finished biography of Jesus Christ, and offers a book to the
Bible student second to none other on the life and works of Christ. It
is worthy of room in every family and Sunday-School
library."--_Express_, Easton, Pa.

"If put into the hand of a child as his first introduction to the study
of the New Testament, it will be read as an ordinary connected history;
and when the Gospels in their common form are afterward read, the
relation of their different parts will be at once understood, and many
otherwise perplexing questions may never even arise."--_The Church
Year_, Jacksonville.

"This is not a Harmony, in the general sense of the term. Though in the
general line of helps in the study of the Evangelical Narrative, it is
something more practical, more living, and shows 'the mark of the tool'
less than any Harmony we are acquainted with. This, we believe, can be
read, and may be used intelligently in the study of The Word. It should
find its way into the libraries of our pastors and Sunday-School
teachers."--_The Guardian_, Philadelphia.

"The task, which the title indicates, is not as easy as might be at
first sight supposed. The passages referring to a particular incident
have not to be merely pitched into a common pile, but built into a
symmetrical structure; and some of the faults which the compiler has to
avoid are the impairing of the authority of the Gospel narrative by the
addition of many words; the sense of incompleteness caused by omissions,
and the disadvantages of references too many and references too few. The
plan which Mr. Pittenger has adopted appears to obviate many of these
difficulties."--_Globe_, Toronto.

"You have wisely chosen the Revised Version with the American Readings
incorporated in the text. The arrangement is in harmony with the best
results of chronological study, and the most natural. The blending of
particular accounts shows good judgment, in the selection of one as a
standard, and filling up the narrative from the others. In performing
this delicate task the golden mean has been quite nearly reached, of not
doing too little or too much. For consecutive reading by either old or
young and for general and popular use, I regard your work as the best
now before the public."--G. W. Clark, D.D.


                       Popular Historical Works.

Green's Larger History of the English People. 5 vols., 16mo, illustrated
  with about 100 fine engravings; half Morocco, $3.50 ($1.00); the same
  without illustrations, Elzevir Edition, cloth, $2.25 (40c); half
  morocco, $2.75 (60c)

"The enthusiasm and painstaking accuracy of the author, and the luminous
style in which he writes, stamp the history as a classic. Every man who
has Anglo-Saxon blood in his veins will be thrilled through and through
by the author's tribute to the race."--_Central Baptist_, St. Louis.

"It is far the best popular history of English civilization and the
progress of civil liberty and social advancement."--_Zion's Herald_,
Boston.

"As yet I have no regrets over any investment in books I have made with
you, and among them I can number Irving, Guizot, Green, Geikie, Dickens
and Scott."--J. W. Thompson, Winchester, Ind.


                   Guizot's France and Civilization.

Guizot's History of France. Illustrated Library Edition, 427 fine
  engravings, 8 vols., 12mo. half Morocco, $6.00 ($1.25)

"Guizot's History of France, has held its place as by far the best
popular history of that country. Clear, vigorous, graphic, even
eloquent, it is as fascinating as a romance: and it is, as well,
comprehensive and thorough. The work has been one of the longed-for
prizes of the general reader of history."--_Republican_, Springfield,
Mass.

"This is a standard work, and Mr. Alden has not only done himself
credit, but has conferred a lasting benefit upon the world, by placing
it within the reach of those of limited means."--_Christian Standard_,
Phila.

Guizot's History of Civilization. 12mo, cloth, 50c. (15c)

"His 'History of Civilization' is classical, and his 'History of France'
the best."--_Bible Banner_, Philadelphia, Pa.

"The history loving portion of the American public may be congratulated
on its opportunity."--_Standard_, Syracuse.


                   Livingstone, Stanley, and Africa.

Livingstone, Stanley and other celebrated travels and adventures in
  Africa, with numerous illustrations. 8vo. cloth, 75c. (20c)

An intensely interesting narrative of the work and adventures of the
great explorers of the "Dark Continent," with illustrations which add
greatly to its value. In view of the popular concern regarding Stanley
the book has a special interest at the present time. It is an excellent
book for young people, particularly for boys.


                            By Charles Lamb.

Lamb, Charles: Last Essays of Elia, cloth, gilt top, 45c. (15c); half
  Morocco, 65c. (25c) Complete Essays; the two vols. in one, on good
  paper, cloth, 60c. (20c)

"The gentleman or lady who would acquire a pure and elegant style should
read Lamb aloud. This is an exercise of the highest and most beneficial
character."--_The Item_, Philadelphia, Pa.

"These essays should be read by everyone. They are still wonderfully
fresh, and because of their merit they are destined to live as long as
our language is spoken."--_The Episcopal Methodist_, Baltimore, Md.


                  Elysian Dreams AND Sober Realities.

Van Santvoord. Half-Holidays, Elysian Dreams, and Sober Realities. By
  Harold Van Santvoord. 12mo, cloth, gilt tops. 85c. (35c)

"Exhibits extensive reading and a pleasant fancy."--_Sun_, New York.

"One of those companionable books that have almost a personality for the
reader.... The vivacity of its thought, the vigor of insight and charm
of expression merit critical appreciation."--_Traveller_, Boston.

"The writer has a genuine instinct for the now almost lost art of essay
writing. His quiet humor, now and then turned by a clever stroke of wit
and well-pointed epigram, and his easy colloquial style, make the
reading of his breezy and interesting volume uncommonly
entertaining."--_Saturday Evening Gazette_, Boston.

"The essays forming the volume show in the writer wide and careful
reading, and a memory stored with the fruits of literary research, with
a happy facility in imparting what he has acquired. His humor is
delicate and mirth-provoking, his illustration of the sentiments
presented and positions taken are apposite and pointed, and the serious
practical teachings scattered throughout the book are calculated to
leave wholesome impressions upon the thoughtful reader."--_Freeman_,
Kingston, N. Y.

"The contents consists of a collection of essays having no essential
relation to one another, none of them long, but all interesting and
suggestive from the originality of the thought, the novelty of the
treatment and the attractive style."--_Times_, Troy.

"Among the brightest of the young American writers, although but a
recent adventurer in the field of authorship, is Harold Van
Santvoord.... His most ambitious attempt, and his most successful, we
sincerely hope, is now before us in the volume entitled, 'Half-Holiday;
Elysian Dreams and Sober Realities.' While not flippant Mr. Van
Santvoord is essentially a humorist, and his humor is of the American
school so often analyzed by the critics. But unlike most of our native
humorists he is scholarly, and even his sprightliest passages reveal
evidence of wide reading."--_Argus_, Albany.

"'Half-Holidays' is a collection of short essays on such subjects as
'Are Parsons Great Eaters,' 'The Hospitality of Solitude,' 'Sermons in
Hot Weather,' 'Lost Books,' 'Music and Madness,' 'The Poetry of
Flowers,' and 'The Significance of a Single Word.' They are after-dinner
papers, bright and lively in their treatment; they make no serious
demand on one's thought, and yet are suggestive of much that is wise in
the philosophy of life, and deal lightly and gracefully with the odds
and ends of everyday existence. They remind one of Lamb's 'Essays of
Elia.'"--_Herald_, Boston.

"One reads this collection of short and bright essays with a feeling
that they were written with more than the ordinary delight of an author.
They are spontaneous recitals of an imaginative mind's observations and
dreams. It occurs to us, as we read, that it would be a suggestive
companion for persons--notably the younger generation--who find it hard
to converse, growing up to realize that it is necessary to say
something, but at a loss what to talk about."--_School Journal_, New
York.


                      Bayard Taylor's Famous Book.

Taylor. Views Afoot; or Europe Seen with Knapsack and Staff. By Bayard
  Taylor. With two portraits and an introduction by N. P. Willis. 12mo,
  481 pages. Long Primer type, cloth, 50c. (20c)

"One of the most famous books of travel ever printed in this country.
The book is less known to readers of this generation than it should be,
and we advise those who are not acquainted with its charm to adopt this
opportunity of making its acquaintance."--_Christian Union_, New York
City.

"Views Afoot is a book of travel which is nearly as interesting now, as
when it first appeared over forty years ago. Taylor was a splendid
sight-seer and a rare recounter of his experiences. This new edition is
one of Alden's efforts to bring good literature within the reach of the
poorest reader."--_Interior_, Chicago, Ill.


                              Views Afoot.

"Bayard Taylor's Views Afoot will long continue to be one of the few
books of European travel which people will delight to read. There is a
charm in the author's style, conjoined with remarkable power of
description. The novelty of his traveling on the continent on foot, with
staff and knapsack, visiting places much out of the way, seeing the
people and living amongst them--all this makes the book a _rara avis_
among books of travel."--_Guardian_, Philadelphia.

"Of all the works of this distinguished author, perhaps no one has more
freshness and enthusiasm than this. We have the ardor and the quick
insight of the afterwards world-renowned poet and author of books of
travel, etc., in the bud of promise. Certainly the volume is very
readable."--_Morning Star_, Boston, Mass.

"We remember with what exquisite pleasure, in our college days, we read
this charmingly-written story of a jaunt a-foot. It was so full of life
and happiness, good-will and abounding health. This new edition does not
dim these excellences at all, and he who especially enjoys reading books
of travel will not read another until he has gone through these
fascinating pages. How cheap this edition is--only 50 cents. Give it to
some travel-mania friend."--_Zion's Herald_, Boston, Mass.

"John B. Alden has put the reading public under renewed obligation by
publishing a cheap edition of Bayard Taylor's 'Views Afoot.' These
chapters delighted the last generation, and they still have their power
to charm and instruct."--_Christian Standard_, Cincinnati, Ohio.


                  Europe SEEN WITH Knapsack and Staff.

"A poor boy, with no literary reputation, he sets out to traverse the
countries of Europe on foot. It was the beginning of an extraordinary
career as a writer, traveler and lecturer. Others have since followed in
his footsteps, but none has ever been able to surpass Bayard Taylor in
originality of observation, in perspicacity of style, or variety of
experiences. It is Europe brought to our own doors."--_Journal and
Messenger_, Cincinnati, Ohio.

"A book well worth reprinting in attractive but inexpensive style. More
than any other, it laid the foundation of Bayard Taylor's reputation as
a traveller and writer. These chapters are written in a style of
charming naïveté and freshness, giving the reader not the hackneyed
views of an experienced and often cynical traveller, but the fresh
enthusiasm of a generous, eager youth, visiting for the first time the
countries of which he had long dreamed. In this respect this earlier
book possesses charms which are denied the later volumes by the same
author. One of the incidental but very real advantages of this book is
to show on what a very small capital (Bayard Taylor started with only
$140), a resolute, plucky American youth can spend two years in foreign
travel, if he is willing to undergo some privations and hardships. It is
a narrative of grit, pluck and endurance as well as of foreign travel.
What was done in 1844 can be done in 1889 if one is equipped with the
same fortitude and courage."--_Golden Rule_, Boston, Mass.


                       A Book for Bible Readers.

*Hurlbut. Manual of Biblical Geography. A Text-Book on Bible History,
  with Maps, Plans, Charts, Diagrams and Illustrations. By Rev. J. L.
  Hurlbut, D.D. Introduction by Rev. J. H. Vincent, D.D. Royal Quarto,
  158 pages. Price. $2.75, reduced to $2.00 (50c);

"We predict for the Manual of Biblical Geography very great success. We
have never seen anything comparable with it.... We wonder how we ever
did without it."--Mrs. A. C. Morrow, Editor of _The Illustrator_, N. Y.
City.

"Is an excellent book and should be in the hands of every Bible
student."--Rev. G. M. Milligan, Toronto, Can.

"I know of no book that so well condenses and groups just what ought to
be known as a framework for all Bible study. To teach without such an
atlas is to half do it."--Rev. E. M. Hill, Montreal, Can.

"This is one of the handiest and most helpful of the helps that I have
seen."--Rev. P. S. Henson, D.D., Chicago, Editor _Baptist Teacher_.

"It will be of great service to teachers, pastors, and students of the
Bible generally."--Rev. Geo. C. Lorimer, D.D., Chicago.

"Cannot fail to be of great service to teachers and scholars of the
Bible."--Rev. C. S. Harrington, D.D., Middletown, Conn.

"Combines in a very high degree, convenience, accuracy, and
completeness."--Rev. Basil Manly, Louisville, Ky.


                               The Koran.

The Koran of Mohammed. Translated by George Sale. 12mo., cloth, 336
  pages, 60c. (20c);

The sacred book of the Mohammedans is not only a curiosity from a
literary point of view, but is also useful in showing how far inferior
to the Bible both in spirit and in teaching is the most popular
substitute which man has ever offered therefor. It contains 114 chapters
varying in length from a few lines to many pages. This is an excellent
translation, is clearly printed on good paper and nicely bound in cloth.
Costs but little and should be in every library. Will interest all
intelligent readers.


                              The Talmud.

Pick. The Talmud. What it is. By Rev. Bernhard Pick, Ph.D. Ideal
  Edition, cloth, 60c. (20c);

"It has proved a grateful task to wander through the mazes of the Talmud
and cull flowers yet sparkling with the very dew of Eden. Figures in
shining garments haunt its recesses. Prayers of deep devotion, sublime
confidence and noble benediction, echo in its ancient tongue. Sentiments
of lofty courage, of high resolve, of infantile tenderness, of
far-seeing prudence, fall from the lips of venerable sages. No less
practicable would it be to stray with an opposite intention, and to
extract venom, instead of honey, from the flowers that seem to spring up
in self-sown profusion."--_Edinburgh Review._

Pick. Apocryphal Life of Jesus. By Rev. Bernhard Pick, Ph.D. Ideal Ed.,
  cloth, _50c._ (20c); 14 oz--The Jews Since the Destruction of
  Jerusalem. Ideal Ed., cloth, _15c._ (4c); 8 oz


              A Grand Book FOR THE SONS OF The Grand Army.

A large portion of the narrative and historical literature of the great
civil war has a profound interest for every patriot as well as for every
soldier. It tells of noble deeds performed by heroic men and furnishes
us with some of the most sublime instances of bravery and fidelity of
which there is either record or tradition. Among the books belonging to
this class is one which is unique in its character, intense in its
interest, and which stands in the front rank of works relating to the
war. In a vivid manner it describes the inception and incidents of that
most daring and brilliant exploit known as


                      The Great Locomotive Chase.

Daring and Suffering. A history of the great Raid and Locomotive chase
  in Georgia in 1862. By William Pittenger. New edition, large 8vo,
  illustrated, cloth, $1.50, post-paid (60c)

--The same, cheap ed., the story complete but omitting documents, paper,
  40c.; cloth, 75c., post-paid.

"The story of the Andrews Railroad Raid must always be one of the most
picturesque, thrilling and moving episodes of the rebellion, and though
the facts were made public many years ago by the author of the work
before us, this exhaustive, revised and expanded narrative, will be
received with the hearty welcome it deserves. 'Daring and Suffering' is
indeed a remarkable book, not only for its matter, but for the manner of
its recital. It deserves to take its place with the most notable
histories of imprisonment and escape."--_Tribune_, N. Y. City.

                          A DARING ENTERPRISE.

"Every reader will agree with Gen. Joseph Holt that the expedition, in
the daring of its conception, had the wildness of romance, 'while in the
gigantic and overwhelming results it sought to obtain it was absolutely
sublime.' An Atlanta paper said of the affair, a few days after its
failure, that it was 'the deepest laid scheme, and on the grandest
scale, that ever emanated from the brains of any number of Yankees
combined.' Count de Paris says in his history of the civil war in
America that, 'despite its tragic termination, it shows what a handful
of brave men could undertake in America.' In truth, there is no parallel
in history to this undertaking of Andrews in an enemy's
country."--_Commercial Gazette_, Cincinnati, O.

"This is a narrative of one of the wildest and most thrilling adventures
of the war." _The Evening Post_, N. Y. City.

                         A VIVID PRESENTATION.

"The realism of the author reminds one of Tolstoi and his military
pictures in the forms of both history and romance."--_The Eagle_,
Brooklyn, N. Y.

"So thrillingly and graphically told that the readers pulses tingle as
his fancy accompanies this wild expedition."--_The Courier_, Buffalo, N.
Y.

"A vivid and authentic account of Andrews' railroad raid--a most daring
adventure."--_The News_, Chicago.

                          THE SONS OF VETERANS

and, indeed, every American, young or old, should read this record of an
heroic effort and the failure of a brilliant enterprise.

"'Daring and Suffering' should be read by every American boy that he may
see what deeds of daring Americans will do for love of country."--_The
Republican_, Washington, D. C.

"This expedition has been so nearly forgotten that the public ought to
be under great obligations to Mr. Pittenger for recording at length the
bravery and endurance of those who participated in it. While such men
exist the republic may never fear for its safety."--_The Sun_, N. Y.
City.

                    A COMPLETE AND ACCURATE RECORD.

"The author has consulted every available source of information, has
gone repeatedly over the ground, explored the Government archives at
Washington and files of Confederate newspapers, and obtained the
assistance of survivors on both sides of the struggle. He is thus able
to present a vivid, impartial and perfectly authenticated picture of the
most romantic event of the civil war, the full story of which has never
before been told." The illustrations also add greatly to the interest
and value of the work.


                       20 Popular Stories $1.00!

The Woman's Story, as told by twenty famous American women, whose names
  are appended. Edited by Laura C. Holloway, with a biographical sketch
  and a fine portrait of each author. Large 12mo, cloth, $1.00 (30c):

Harriett Beecher Stowe.

Harriett Prescott Spofford.

Rebecca Harding Davis.

Edna Dean Proctor.

"Josiah Allen's Wife."

Nora Perry.

Augusta Evans Wilson.

Louise Chandler Moulton.

Celia Thaxter.

"Grace Greenwood."

Abba Gould Woolson.

Mary J. Holmes

Margaret E. Sangster.

Oliver Thorne Miller.

Elizabeth W. Champney.

Julia C. R. Dorr.

Marion Harland.

Louisa May Alcott.

Ella Wheeler Wilcox.

Rose Terry Cooke.

"This collection of the best stories by twenty of the foremost American
story-tellers is a happy idea, and it seems as if for a few hours of
really enjoyable entertainment nothing better could be devised. There is
a special charm about a good short tale, and these twenty samples of
feminine literature afford a chance for interesting comparison of
achievement in the same plane and with nearly similar opportunity. The
sad, the gay, the sentimental, the horrible, the good, the real, are to
be found in these pages viewed and dealt with in various ways; and none
but writers of acknowledged ability are admitted to the group."--_Daily
Alta Californian_, San Francisco, Cal.

"Besides being enjoyable reading, it is a valuable book of reference for
information concerning the most celebrated literary women of
America."--_National Baptist_, Philadelphia, Pa.

                           19 FINE PORTRAITS.

"A compilation of a score of stories written by noted lady authors on
this side of the Atlantic has been prepared by Laura C. Holloway. This
vivacious lady and charming author has written as an introduction to
each story, a bit of the biography of each of her chosen lady writers;
making her work still more interesting by prefixing a portrait to
each--with the exception of one case, Mrs. Rebecca Harding Davis, who
"won't sit for anybody." * * * How much of interest is added to a
literary production--especially a woman's--if one can see the author's
portrait too!"--_The Times_, Hartford, Conn.

"It is quite interesting and curious to see which of their own stories
these Writers considered their best."--_The Homestead_, Springfield,
Mass.

                    20 Biographies of Famous Women.

"Among the many excellent books relating to women from the pen of this
author, this is the most unique in its plan. It is a library in itself,
a library affording the best specimens from all the leading lady authors
of America. To enumerate the writers from whom the selections are taken,
would be sufficient to awaken a desire to have the book, but when we add
that there is a portrait of each of these famous authors except one, and
that there is a biographical sketch of each written in Mrs. Holloway's
attractive style, the merits and value of the work will begin to
appear."--_Farm, Field and Stockman_, Chicago, Ill.


                           Oliver Goldsmith.

Oliver Goldsmith, The Works of. Edited by Sir James Prior. In 4 vols.,
  12mo, $3.00 ($1.25);

The only edition embodying the full performances of and fairly
exhibiting Goldsmith genius. Contains many and valuable additions to
collections previously issued.

"Goldsmith, both in verse and prose, was one of the most delightful
writers in the language. His verse flows like a limpid stream. His ease
is quite unconscious. Everything in him is spontaneous, unstudied,
unaffected, yet elegant, harmonious, graceful, and nearly
faultless."--Hazlitt.

"The 'Traveller' and the 'Deserted Village' scarcely claim any notice
from me. They are in everyone's hands; they live in everyone's memory:
they are felt in everyone's heart; they are daily the delight of
millions."--Henry Neele.

"Sir, it is the great excellence of a writer to put into his book as
much as his book will hold. Goldsmith has done this in his history. He
has the art of saying everything he has to say in a pleasing
manner."--Dr. Johnson.

Vicar of Wakefield: Ideal Edition. Cloth, _25c._ (11c); 10 oz

"The admirable ease and grace of the narrative as well as the pleasing
truth with which the principal characters are designed, make the Vicar
of Wakefield one of the most delicious morsels of fictitious composition
on which the human mind was ever employed. We read the Vicar of
Wakefield in youth; we return to it again and again, and bless the
memory of an author who contrives so well to reconcile us to human
nature."--Sir Walter Scott.

She Stoops to Conquer: Ideal Edition. Cloth, _20c._ (7c); 8 oz

She Stoops to Conquer.--"I know of no comedy for many years that has so
much exhilarated an audience; that has answered so much the great end of
comedy, making an audience merry."--Samuel Johnson.

Life of Goldsmith: by Washington Irving. Elzevir Ed., gilt edges, _40c._
  (20c); cloth, _25c._ (9c); 14 oz

"No poet's letters in the world, not even those of Cowper, appear to us
more interesting for the light they throw on the habits and feelings of
the man who wrote them; and we think it will be also acknowledged that
the simple gracefulness of their language is quite worthy of the author
of 'Wakefield.'"--_London Quarterly Review._

"The $5.00 Edition of Irving's Works arrived to-day; the type, binding,
paper and printing are superb: the cheapest set of books I ever
purchased. Accept our congratulations."--W. H. Kelsey, Springville, W.
T.


                       Green's Brilliant History.

Green's Larger History of the English People. 5 vols., 16mo, illustrated
  with about 100 fine engravings: half Morocco, _$3.50_ ($1.00): the
  same without illustrations, Elzevir Edition, cloth, _$2.25_ (40c);
  half morocco, _$2.75_ (60c);

Green's History as above, in one vol., 8vo, without illustrations,
  cloth, _$1.25_ (35c):

A copy of this magnificent work should be in every home in which the
English language is spoken.

"No man can claim to be thoroughly posted on English history unless he
has read Green. The enthusiasm and painstaking accuracy of the author,
and the luminous style in which he writes, stamp the history as a
classic. Every man who has Anglo-Saxon blood in his veins will be
thrilled through and through by the author's tribute to the race. It
will live long as the most attractive of the numerous English
histories"--_Cen'l Baptist_, St. Louis.

"In many respects the most satisfactory History of England that has yet
been written. It is certainly wonderfully cheap."--_The North American_,
Philadelphia.

"Is recognized by scholars as the best complete modern History of
England in existence. Its finish of style removes it from the catalogue
of books of reference, and makes the study of it a delight."--_Press_,
St. Paul, Minn.

"Green's History is one of the most brilliant and thoroughly valuable
historical works which has appeared in many years. Fairly ranking with
Macaulay's great work in the absorbing interest of its narrative, it
excels that in adaptation to popular needs, in that it covers the entire
period of English history from the earliest to modern times, instead of
a brief period as does Macaulay."--_Methodist Recorder_, Pittsburgh, Pa.

Grace Greenwood's My Pets, cloth. _30c._ (10c): 10 oz Stories for Home
  Folks, cl., _40c._ (15c); 14oz Travel and History, cl., _30c._ (10c);
  12 oz Stories from Famous Ballads, cl., _30c._ (10c); 10 oz


                         A Great French Novel.

The Immortal. By Alphonse Daudet. 12mo, cloth, 60c. (20c);

"It is a satire on the famous company of the 'Immortals,' and any one
who reads it, will discover the peculiar talents of the author. He has a
very retentive memory, and extraordinary powers of description. He gives
to his heroes and heroines a life-like reality, so that the reader is
carried right on into the turmoil of their existence. Daudet makes his
characters perform the most merciless and pitiless actions, and his
powers of description are so vivid, that the reader moves on with it
all, in spite of himself. Get a copy of the book and test the truth of
this assertion."--_The School Journal_, N. Y. City.

"The book springs out of Daudet's unquestionable and irrepressible
genius; he dips his pen, not in malice, but in a literary inspiration
which delights all Europe and America."--_The Church Year_,
Jacksonville, Fla.

"The book is a fierce onslaught on the French Academy, but exhibits the
best traits of its accomplished author, a man who is never dull and has
most extraordinary powers of description and character drawing, his
stories always offering not puppets, but men and women moving before
one's eyes."--_Christian Intelligencer_, N. Y. City.


                         A Great Russian Novel.

Gogol. Taras Bulba, translated by Jeremiah Curtin, cloth, 60c. (20c);

"This thrilling Cossack tale is put into English by Jeremiah Curtin,
with a 'dedication' to Hon. Andrew G. Curtin, in which is set forth the
fact (as shown by correspondence between Napoleon III. and Alexander
II.) that France and England had agreed to recognize the Southern
Confederacy, and were only kept from it by Russia's friendliness to us.
The preface by the translator, too, is full of historic interest,
preparing the reader to understand the story of old Taras."--_Christian
Standard_, Cincinnati.

"Although the reader may not admire all the traits of character of old
Taras Bulba, he will become so interested in the story at the very
beginning that he will not be willing to lay the book down until
completed. The whole volume is so full of valuable information that no
one can afford not to read it."--_The Democrat_, Madison, Wis.

"A more romantic and profoundly interesting recital has not come to our
notice that involved Russian politics and character and Polish
patriotism and devotion. Gogol is entitled by this work to rank with
Turgenieff, and while he is not the philosopher that Tolstoi is, nor a
man of such learning, he is worthy to be his contemporary and is equally
graceful and vigorous in his style."--_Record-Union_, Sacramento, Cal.

"This singular story is full of graphic touches. Now they paint the
squalor of the Jews' quarter in Warsaw, now the fierce combat of half
savage men, now the flower-strewn steppes, and now the deepest,
tenderest passion of the human heart. The translator does not exaggerate
in his praise of Gogol's work."--_Christian Cynosure_, Chicago.


                            Great Statesmen.

International Statesman Series. Biographies of great social and
  political leaders. Edited by Lloyd C. Sanders. Cloth, per vol., 75c.;
  reduced to 60c. (15c):

1. Lord Beaconsfield. By T. E. Kebbel.

2. Viscount Palmerston. By Lloyd C. Sanders.

3. Prince Metternich. By G. B. Malleson.

4. O'Connell. By J. A. Hamilton.

5. Lord Bolingbroke. By Arthur Hassall.

6. Sir Robert Peel. By F. C. Montague.

This series presents in a concise and eminently readable form
biographical sketches of the great leaders in the political history of
the world. It will cover ancient as well as modern times and will
include the representative men of all prominent nations. These books
contain about 225 pages each, bound in uniform style, and are very
cheap.

"The volumes and the series have particular reasons to engross the
attention of students, among general readers; and it may safely be
predicted that the series will afford quite as intelligent and clear a
view of the course and expression of English politics as can be secured
without long and laborious search of many and more or less conflicting
volumes. The books are models in typographical qualities, and are
inexpensive."--_Boston Globe_.


                             CIVILIZATION.

The Beginnings of Civilization. By Prof. Charles Woodward Hutson. Ideal
  Ed., cl., 60c. (20c);

"To-day the secrets of prehistoric humanity lie beneath the surfaces of
language and archæology. We gaze into the depths and see the objects
lying along the bottom, but we do not all see alike. Perhaps we are not
yet acquainted with the media through which we look. Whether we are
contented or not to take as final the present conclusions of any one of
the various schools of archæologists, it remains that the facts or data
are intensely interesting. Touching the origin of man, it is probable
that we shall never be able to determine from the Bible or from
ethnology whether all men sprang from one pair or from many; and
salvation does not depend upon a decision. Whether, with the Duke of
Argyll, we believe humanity to have retrogressed as a result of the
Fall: whether with the Jews of the Talmud and Book of Zohar, we suppose
that man was created first as a beast, and after ages received the
spirit by the breath of God; or whether we hold man to be the result of
natural selection and survival of the fittest acting as forces upon some
protoplasmic blobs of jelly, we shall never get beyond conjecture. These
questions Professor Hutson has ignored as vain and profitless. In his
volume he has succeeded in condensing and including more learning,
philosophic thought, and curious and significant data than it has been
our fortune to behold these many days. His object is to take up the
prehistoric ages of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Hittites, Phoenicians,
Hebrews, Assyrians, Teutons, Etruscans, Hellenes, Kelts, Hindus,
Chinese, Slavs, etc.; and, broad as seems the field, he has not
contented himself with easy and vague generalizations, but by a concise
and compact style, has been able to introduce a great number of data.
Small as this book is, we can hardly trust ourselves to express our
sense of its value, lest we seem to exaggerate."--_The School Journal_,
N. Y. City.


   _Artistically, it is, perhaps, the finest product of The Literary
                              Revolution._
                           FLORIAN'S FABLES.
                      Finely Illustrated Edition.

_The FABLES of FLORIAN._ Translated into English verse by Gen. J. W.
  Phelps, late member of the Vermont Historical Society, author of "A
  History of Madagascar," etc. With numerous very fine illustrations by
  J. J. Grandville. Elegantly bound in fine cloth, gilt edges,
  ornamented, price _$1.15_

The above described work is presented to our patrons with an unusual
degree of pleasure, and some pride. The fables are good reading--old and
young will be delighted with them; they are worthy of place by the side
of Æsop's and La Fontaine's; the illustrations are simply superb, true
to the text, supplementing and enforcing the teachings of the author,
and true to art, original, graphic, and charming.

"Of all the collections of Fables which have appeared since La Fontaine,
that of Florian is, beyond dispute, the best. It is also, of all the
works of the author, that in which his talent as a writer and as a poet
shows to the greatest advantage. In regard to merit of originality, the
author avows himself that he has put under contribution all his
predecessors; Æsop, Pilpay, Gay, and above all, the Spanish poet
Yriarte, who has furnished him the most pleasing apologues. It is worthy
of remark that in this kind of literature, whose object is no less to
instruct than to please, Florian has one advantage over La Fontaine,
that of being in general better adapted to the unaffected simplicity of
childhood."--_Grand Dictionnaire Universel du xixe. Siècle._

"Good of every description prevails in this collection. You find here
some fables of touching interest, others of a sweet and playful humor,
others of a biting subtilty, and still others in a loftier strain
without being above that of the fable. The poet understands how to vary
his colors with the subjects; he can describe and converse, relate and
moralize. We nowhere feel the effort and are always sensible of the
metre."--_La Harpe._

"In the writings of Florian we are solely interested with the meaning of
the tale, with its moral, which is always refined and delicate, and with
his ingenuous and even epigrammatic style. Florian loves Horace, Virgil,
La Fontaine, is delighted with Montaigne and the poetic tales of the
16th century; he notices the caprices and little irregularities of human
nature, without being a biting critic or a profound moralist. Under the
gentle form of fables he threw an agreeable breeze of ridicule both upon
the individual and upon society, as if he hoped to reform."--_M. St.
Marc Girardin._

"Few readers of French are unacquainted with the works of Florian. His
style, at once elegant and easy, has universally recommended him to the
teachers of language, and Telemachus is commonly succeeded or supplanted
by some work of Florian. In the circulating libraries the Tales of
Florian are almost as generally read as those of Voltaire and Marmontel.
He possesses indeed very great attractions for the lovers of light
reading. His narrative is spirited and interesting. Love, Friendship,
and Heroism are his themes, and he commonly descants upon them with that
genuine warmth which results from the combination of sensibility with
genius.

"The feelings with him are never exalted at the expense of virtue. His
women are tender without licentiousness, and his heroes daring without
violating the laws of their country, or questioning the existence of
their Creator. He combines the morality of Fenelon with the enthusiasm
of Rousseau or St. Pierre. His writings derive an additional charm from
his glowing descriptions of the beauties of nature. He seems tenaciously
to uphold the poetical connection between rural life and moral purity,
and loves to annex to tales of love and hardihood their appropriate
scenery of rivers, woods, and mountains."--_London Quarterly Review._


                        The Unity of the Truth.

The Unity of the Truth in Christianity and Evolution. By J. Max Hark,
  D.D. 12mo. 293 pages. Small Pica type, leaded, cloth, gilt top, uncut
  pages, _90c._

Few books of its kind recently published have aroused more discussion
and called forth more varied and contradictory opinions. For example,
_The Andover Review_ gave fifteen pages to a criticism of its positions;
while _The Christian Union_, of equal authority, declares that "The
volume deserves to take rank with the works of Munger, Newman Smyth, and
Prof. Drummond." The N. Y. _Independent_, though granting that "in many
respects the volume is instructive and suggestive," and "its aim merits
commendation," has devoted over four columns to combatting its
arguments; whereas the critical _Sunday-School Times_ has heartily
commended it in a leading review. While the _Presbyterian Quarterly_ (S.
C.) condemns it as being "of no more use than to show the antagonism of
the human heart to the things of God," the _Reformed Review_ (Pa.)
praises it as "an earnest effort towards the solution of a grave and
difficult problem," and says, "The author deserves the thanks of all who
are sincerely interested in the progress of religion and in the welfare
of the Church." Such contradictions from such sources are the strongest
proof of the importance of the work, and of the need of every
intelligent person's reading and judging it for himself. At the same
time, however, by far the greater weight of criticism, religious and
secular, is favorable to it, as will be seen by the following few

                           Critical Comments.

"A very remarkable book, written in a nervous, brilliant style, each
phrase a squarely-planted and advancing step. That it will bring peace
and conviction to many restless souls cannot be doubted."--_The World_,
N. Y. City.

"We have seen no volume which seems to us so thorough and intelligent in
its purpose to consider the relations between modern evolutionary
thought and ancient Christian faith and doctrines. Does not attempt to
reconcile science and religion by tearing away either the one or the
other."--_The Christian Union_, N. Y. City.

"A good, wholesome book, brief enough for the busiest Christian, an
honest untechnical book, of plain words, and powerful. It is an
admirable essay, informed with the essence of true religion, and
destined to bring light to many struggling Christians."--_The Press_,
Philadelphia.

"He speaks with freshness and enthusiasm. We are persuaded that Dr.
Hark's purpose and spirit are such that good will be wrought by his
work."--_Illus. Christian Weekly_, N. Y. City.

"A candid and thoughtful discussion; expounded with much earnestness and
a fine religious spirit."--_Literary World_, Boston.

"It can hardly fail to help the candid reader to a wider and more
satisfactory view of God, of Providence, of Prayer, and of Religion.
Whatever does this for man has proved an infinite blessing to
him."--_Christian Evangelist_, St. Louis.

"Significant as showing very clearly the drift of the orthodox creed in
the hands of its intelligent supporters."--_Sunday News_, Charleston, S.
C.

"A sincere and reverent endeavor to help all inquiring souls, in trouble
concerning the conflict between evolution and the doctrines of
Christianity."--_The Interior_, Chicago.

"No writer could approach any question with a more candid spirit or more
honorable motive. We wish every clergyman could read the work, and every
other person indeed who is interested in the question of
evolution."--_Herald of Gospel Liberty_, Dayton, O.


                         The Spirit of Beauty.

The Spirit of Beauty. Essays, Scientific and Æsthetic. By Prof. Henry W.
  Parker. Large 12mo, cloth, 85c.;

"I have already read a large part of the book, and I have been
delighted, instructed, and morally animated. It gives rich, delicate,
and robust expression to a various knowledge, as well as to fine, devout
and far-reaching thought. I have not for long taken up a book which has
interested me so immediately, or refreshed me so abundantly."--Rev. R.
S. Storrs, D.D., Brooklyn, N. Y.

"An admirable treatment of a widely related theme. The book is none the
less profound for being so pungent, and its sharp raciness of style is
quite befitting its keen discrimination of thought."--Pres. Julius H.
Seelye, LL.D., Amherst College.

"I appreciate it highly. The incisive but graceful style is worthy the
pure and elevating sentiments and conceptions which it inculcates. I
feel a singular sympathy with its way of thinking, and shall embrace
every proper opportunity to call attention to a book so brilliant and so
noble in its aims."--Prof. Alexander Winchell, LL.D., Michigan
University.

"I know Prof. Parker chiefly by the articles he gave me for the _North
American Review_. These gave me the highest regard for him as an
original, sound and deep thinker. I have repeatedly characterized his
article on the natural theology of art as the best paper that passed
under my hands during the ten or eleven years of my editorship. My
belief is that Mr. Parker's æsthetic capacity and culture are
unsurpassed among us."--Prof. A. P. Peabody, D.D., of Harvard
University.

"Prof. Parker, like the late President Hitchcock, was continually laying
in rich stores of facts and principles in the several departments of
natural history. At the same time he was contributing to the _North
American Review_ articles in natural and ethical philosophy unexcelled
for richness and beauty by any contemporaneous productions of American
periodical literature."--Prof. W. S. Tyler, LL.D., of Amherst College.

"By personal knowledge of the manuscript I know that Prof. Parker has
investigated the subjects of Animal Intelligence and Animal Æsthetics in
a new and fresh way, as never has been done before, in defence of a
spiritual philosophy. It is a work that was greatly needed, and is
thoroughly done by Dr. Parker, as only an accomplished naturalist, a
skilful literateur and a clear reasoner could do it."--Ex-President G.
F. Magoun, D.D., of Iowa College.

"The title is a gem in itself, and I have named my wife after it. I have
had a copy presented to the Philosophical Society of Great Britain, and
have urgently recommended the author for honorary membership, and am
assured of success. These deeds are better encomiums than words like the
following:--that I deem it one of the best displays of the connection
between science and religion I have ever met with. A grand
book."--Ephraim Cutter, M.D., LL.D., Hon. F. S. Sc. (London), Mem.
Victoria Inst., etc.

"The author is a naturalist and in quite familiar with the facts and
views of Darwin, Spencer and Haeckel; and, whatever restrictions he may
make upon them, he has made as a man who has studied the subject from
the inside. The observation of facts in the organic and inorganic worlds
is good."--_Science._

"In Prof. Henry W. Parker's volume we have just one of those protests
against the recent schools of philosophical sensationalism which are
sure to be raised, sooner or later, in the name of esthetics. We welcome
everything that will bring intelligent people to see that it is not
dogmatic orthodoxy alone or the limited and perhaps narrow interests of
sectarian religion which are assailed by this philosophy, but the whole
spiritual theory of man, the basis of his esthetic ideas and of art in
all its higher relations. This is the value of Professor Parker's book.
It is attractive in style and indicates an abundant familiarity with the
subject, both as a naturalist and a student of esthetics. The chapter on
the Divine in Art can hardly be surpassed in the literature of the
subject."--_N. Y. Independent._

"_The Spirit of Beauty_, by Prof. Parker, is a fresh find in John B.
Alden's literary gold mine. It is a series of essays, æsthetic and
scientific, inspired by a reverent passion for purity and beauty, and
clothed in the language of a ripe and finished scholar. The essays are
all overflowing with beauty, melody and fragrance, as well as charged
with learning and profound thought."--_Southern Criterion_, Atlanta, Ga.


                         The Talmud: What It Is

and What it Knows about Jesus and his Followers. By Rev. Bernhard Pick,
  Ph.D. Ideal Edition, Small Pica type, cloth, 60c.;

One of the most interesting and valuable of recent contributions to
religious literature. It answers the great popular curiosity as to what
the Talmud is, and gives to clergymen and theological students
information of transcendant value, not heretofore accessible to many.

"That wonderful monument of human industry, human wisdom, and human
folly."--Dean Milman.

"In the history of the origin of Christianity, the Talmud has hitherto
been far too much neglected."--Ernest Renan.

"The Talmud may compete with the _Constitutions of Loyola_ for the right
to be considered the most irresistible organ ever forged for the
subjugation of the human will."--_Edinburgh Review._

"The Talmud is the slow growth of several centuries. It is a chaos of
Jewish learning, wisdom and folly, a continent of rubbish with hidden
pearls of true maxims and poetic fables."--Philip Schaff.

"But glimpses of profound metaphysics, stray parables of real beauty,
and occasional sentiments of true spiritual breadth and elevation, are
only the rare grains of wheat in mountains of chaff."--Dr. Geikie.

"Anything more utterly unhistorical than the Talmud cannot be conceived.
It is probable that no human writings ever confounded names, dates, and
facts with more absolute indifference. Some excellent maxims may be
quoted from the Talmud where they lie imbedded like pearls in a sea of
obscurity and mud."--Canon Farrar.

"A most curious monument, raised with astonishing labor, yet made up of
puerilities. An immense heap of rubbish, at the bottom of which a few
bright pearls of Eastern wisdom are to be found. The book composed by
Israel _without_ their God, in the time of their dispersion, their
misery, and their degeneracy."--Dr. Isaac Da Costa.

"Here, then, we find a prodigious mass of contradictory opinions, an
infinite number of casuistical cases, a logic of scholastic theology,
some recondite wisdom, and much rambling dotage; many puerile tales and
oriental fancies; ethics and sophisms, reasonings and unreasonings,
subtle solutions, and maxims and riddles."--Benjamin Disraeli.

"It is a vast debating club in which there hum confusedly the myriad
voices of at least five centuries. In its way, a unique code of laws, in
comparison with which, in point of comprehensiveness, the law books of
all other nations are but Lilliputian, and, when compared with the hum
of its kaleidoscopic Babel, they resemble, indeed, calm and studious
retreat."--Prof. Delitzsch.

"It has proved a grateful task to wander through the mazes of the Talmud
and cull flowers yet sparkling with the very dew of Eden. Figures in
shining garments haunt its recesses. Prayers of deep devotion, sublime
confidence and noble benediction, echo in its ancient tongue. Sentiments
of lofty courage, of high resolve, of infantile tenderness, of
far-seeing prudence, fall from the lips of venerable sages. No less
practicable would it be to stray with an opposite intention, and to
extract venom, instead of honey, from the flowers that seem to spring up
in self-sown profusion. Fierce, intolerant, vindictive hatred for
mankind; idle subtlety; pride and self conceit amounting to insanity;
indelicacy pushed to a grossness that renders what it calls virtue more
hateful than the vice of more modest people; all these strung together
would give no more just an idea of the Talmud than would the chaplets of
its lovelier flowers."--_Edinburgh Review._


                          A Remarkable Story.

Strange Threads. A Novel. By J. Douglas. 12mo, cloth, 60c. (15c); 22 oz

This is not only a remarkable story in itself but is really wonderful in
its power to interest its readers, and in the various ways in which it
impresses them. A gentleman whom the _Christian Leader_, Cincinnati,
calls "a wise and critical connossieur" pronounces this book, with the
possible exception of Vanity Fair, "the most original novel I ever read.
* * I should have to go back as far as 'Jane Eyre' and 'Villette,' to
name a novel as good as 'Strange Threads,' and I am not at all certain
that this is not as strong as either of them." And the _Leader_ calls
the book the "creation of a master imagination" and declares it to be
"evidently the product of a genius." The burden of testimony is along
this line. Still there are

                          A FEW CONTRARY MINDS

whose opinions we quote in connection with the favorable criticisms.

"One can conceive that with less effort the author might write a
passable book. As to the present book it is fairly unreadable, and the
veriest devourer of romances cannot possibly get past the opening
chapters without the feeling that he is in for a bad time."--_Daily
Bee_, Omaha, Neb.

"The publisher has done more than the writer for this book. The type and
paper are so agreeable that one is tempted to read on, long after the
discovery that there is little in the matter worthy of serious
consideration. The author has shown a certain shrewdness, however, in
filling the vacuum produced by absence of intellect in the book by
cramming it with sentiment."--_The Epoch_, N. Y. City.

                             MAN OR WOMAN?

Another matter about which the critics are puzzled is the sex of the
author. Some affirm that J. Douglas is a man, others are equally sure
that it is a woman's name, while some are content to say they do not
know.

"J. Douglas is a new name in our list of novel-writers, but if 'Strange
Threads' is his maiden effort, he is surely a phenomenon. Regarded as
the first work of a new writer, it is simply wonderful; even as the
product of mature experience it is still worthy of being termed
remarkable. It is original without being strained or whimsical,
wholesomely terse in construction, frequently bright in epigram, and the
story grows stronger with every page to the close. It is not too much to
say that it will bear reading along with the novels of Charlotte Bronte,
and the writer succeeds even better than she in picturing his characters
in life-like presence without making an elaborate study of them, while
there is a more perceptible and worthier motive in his drawing."--_Paper
World._ Springfield, Mass.

"J. Douglas is evidently a woman. The adventures of a party of American
novelists in Europe, their love-making and their heart disappointments,
are the author's stock in trade, and she has certainly succeeded in
weaving a very tangled web. There are here and there a strong
portraiture and a keen analysis of motives, while the descriptive
portions have a picturesqueness and vigor which give old and
well-traveled roads a new beauty."--_Record_, Philadelphia.

"It is probable that "J." stands for Jane, Josephine or some other name
feminine, for the book is thoroughly a woman's book. It certainly is
very well written, and, if by a new aspirant for literary honors, as it
seems, she is certain to make her mark."--_The Republic_, St. Louis, Mo.

"A new American novelist of considerable originality and force has
appeared. The name is J. Douglas, though whether it stands for man or
woman must be gathered from the book. The dialogue is bright, the
situations are dramatic and the book is thoroughly readable from
beginning to end."--_Illus. Christian Weekly_, N. Y. City.

                      PRE-EMINENTLY A LOVE STORY.

"A love Story; a bright sketchy tale of a wayward young lady--that is,
wayward in her loves. It is certainly very original; on the whole, is a
novel to be liked by the public."--_Times_, Kansas City, Mo.

"A most interesting work, which engrosses the attention of the reader
from the first to the last chapter."--_Morning Call_, San Francisco.


                 Lang Syne, or the Wards of Mt. Vernon.

Lang Syne; or The Wards of Mount Vernon. By Mary Stuart Smith. 12mo,
  paper, 30c. (10c)., cloth, 60c. (20c).

In this book, which is dedicated "To the Memory of Washington and to
American Womanhood," we have an interesting love story of the
revolutionary era, in which are interwoven in a skilful manner many
excellent descriptions of prominent events and of the eminent men,
Washington, Lee, Franklin, Cadwalader, and others, who were foremost in
the great struggle for independence. It also shows the important part
taken by the women of that period and the valuable service which they
rendered the patriot army. About one-third of the book is specially
devoted to "the Women of the Revolution." A great deal of information
regarding the character, habits, tastes, and labors of the people of
that stirring period is conveyed in an entertaining manner. The author,
who styles herself a "Daughter of Virginia" (and who might have stated
the interesting fact that she is a direct descendant of Gen.
Washington's only sister) has done well to write this book, and its
appearance at this centennial period is appropriate and timely.


                            Patriotic Hymns.

Rankin. Hymns Pro Patria. By Rev. J. E. Rankin, D.D. Ideal Edition,
  cloth, 60c. (20c).

Dr. Rankin needs no introduction to the American public. As a clergyman
and an author he long ago won high reputation. In this little volume
will be found his more recent poems. They include some of his finest
work and will certainly add to his reputation as a genuine poet. In the
collection are Hymns for Forefather's Day. National Hymns, Humanitarian
Hymns, Foreign Missionary Hymns, Christian Endeavor Hymns, and several
Hymns relating to Christian Experience. The book will interest many.


                    Jerry: A Story for Young Folks.

Pratt. Jerry. By Ellen P. Pratt. 12mo, cloth, 75c. (25c).

This is a spirited story which will especially please the young people,
though it will furnish no small degree of entertainment to their elders.
It opens sadly with a record of intemperance and misery, but the scene
soon changes and the love story opens in earnest. Various adventures,
some of them quite remarkable, are narrated. The characters are
numerous, events move rapidly, and the interest deepens until the
closing page is reached.


              The Medical Student _As Pictured in Punch._

Smith. The London Medical Student. By Albert Smith. 12mo, cloth, 50c.
  (20c).

In this book the career of a student in a London Medical College is
traced in a broadly humorous manner. The appearance of the "new man"
when he comes up from the country to continue his medical studies is
aptly described, and the zeal with which he enters upon his new duties
is delineated in a laughable manner. His subsequent course, his dodging
of recitations, the letters home for money with which, ostensibly, to
purchase books, his examination, and the various "Curiosities of Medical
Experience," follow in a similar strain. The work is reprinted from
_Punch_, in which it appeared as a serial.


                           Dorance: A Novel.

Nelson. Dorance; A Novel. By R. E. Nelson. 12mo, cloth, 75c. (25c).

This first novel by an author as yet unknown to the public will find
sympathetic readers among those who still read Uncle Tom's Cabin.

"Of Virginia blood, but of Northern birth, my earliest sympathies were
aroused in behalf of the people of both races of the 'Sunny Southland,'
and my imagination was made alive by the glowing pictures of Southern
life, gleaned from my friends and from books on the subject. If I have
succeeded in interesting my young friends in this phase of life, which
has now passed into history, the problem of which is still unsolved in a
measure, I will have fully accomplished my purpose in writing this
book."--_Author's Preface._


Bonds are issued in amounts to suit the purchaser, not less that $10.00;
they are also made payable, if desired, in six months, or three months,
the coupon being reduced in proportion with the time. If cash is
preferred to books, the coupons will be purchased by the Company, at
maturity of bond, at the price of $1.00 for a $10.00 one-year bond, and
pro rata for others. The following examples of prices (full price list
in Catalogue) to the Public (first price) and to Stockholders (second
price) indicate value of the Bond as an investment to one wanting books:

  Geikie's Holy Land    $2.75    $1.75
  Wallace's Repose in Egypt    1.00    50
  Robert Elsmere    50    30
  Alden's Home Atlas    2.25    1.45
  Ruskin's Choice Works    60    40
  Boswell's Johnson    $2.75    $1.50
  Hallam's Middle Ages    3.00    2.00
  Drummond's Natural Law    50    35
  The Kalevala, cloth    2.25    1.50
  Ideal Shakespeare, 12 vols.    6.00    3.50
  Hours with the Bible    50    30
  Goldsmith's Works    3.00    1.75
  Tom Brown at Rugby    25    18
  Irving's Washington    1.25    75
  Interwoven Gospels    90    60


                   LITERARY REVOLUTION SAVINGS-BOND.

One year after date The Alden Publishing Co. will pay to the order of
_____________ _____________ the sum of Ten Dollars, at the Importers'
and Traders' National Bank, 247 Broadway, New York.

These bonds are negotiable and are sold to the patrons of _The Literary
Revolution_ at par. The object is to afford a practical system of
co-operation by which buyers of books may get them at cost of
manufacture and handling. The use of the money one year is more than
sufficient time to print, bind and market a paying edition of an average
book. The investor gets for the use of his money 16 per cent. per annum,
_payable in books_ (see coupon); he also gets an _option_ of purchase
(see coupon) which, if he avails himself of it, will, with the 16 per
cent., earn and save him at the rate of about 60 per cent. per annum
(see Stockholders' Prices), on his $10 investment. These bonds are
issued in amounts to suit the purchaser, not less than $10; they are
also made payable, if desired, in Six months, or Three months, the
coupon being reduced pro rata with the time.

 Dated at the office of the Company, 393 Pearl St., New York, this ____
                        day of __________ 188__.
                       THE ALDEN PUBLISHING CO.,
                                                              President.


                COUPON LITERARY REVOLUTION SAVINGS-BOND.

The Alden Publishing Co. will pay to _____________ _____________ or
order the sum of _One Dollar and Sixty Cents_, on demand, in any of _its
own publications_ at Stockholders' prices, deliverable at any office of
the Company, and will also permit the holder hereof to purchase at
Stockholders' prices any books advertised by it to an amount not
exceeding the value of _Six Dollars_, net.

This paper is negotiable and transferable when properly endorsed, and
will be honored at any time after its date, at any office of the
Company, upon presentation, accompanied by cash remittance for the books
to be purchased at Stockholders' prices, and also by the cost of postage
on all the books so ordered, if to be sent by mail.

     No. 393 Pearl St., New York, the ____ day of __________ 188__.
                       THE ALDEN PUBLISHING CO.,
                                                              President.




              New Catalogue--_Important Change in Terms._


The accompanying catalogue is thoroughly revised to date, and differs
from its predecessors materially in the one point, that the prices given
include the _cost of pre-payment_ by mail or express--instead of the New
York City _net prices_, to which the cost of postage has been added,
heretofore.

The change is principally one of convenience rather than of either
reduction or increase, though on many books there is a substantial
reduction in the cost to purchasers, cost of transportation being taken
into account. An allowance of _8 cents a pound_, which is made on bills
ordered sent by express or freight, cost of transportation payable on
arrival, by the purchaser, is equivalent to a discount of front _15 to
30 per cent_. from catalogue prices, varying according to quality,
style, copyright, and other considerations, on different books.

The first page of the catalogue fully and clearly sets forth the new
terms.




                            Wanted--Agents.


Personally you may not care to go into the "Book Agency Business," but
possibly you may know of some good person who will undertake to
"organize a book club" in your neighborhood, or make a thorough
house-to-house canvass of the entire township or county. A $1.00 Book
Free to you (your choice) if you will send me the address of such a
person, who will sell for me as much as $25 worth of books within two
months from time of taking hold. As a means of making my books better
known I want to have at least one sample book put into every intelligent
household; once there they are a permanent advertisement.

A few of my publications are unexcelled, _for experienced book agents_,
notably

Alden's Manifold Cyclopedia.

Alden's Cyclopedia of Universal Literature.

Geikie's Holy Land and the Bible.

The Great Locomotive Chase (the most thrilling and unique story of the
  war).

The Woman's Story (by Twenty Famous American Women, Mrs. Stowe, Miss
  Alcott, and others).

Alden's Home Atlas, and Handy Atlas,

and several others which could be named. Please do anything you can to
further the interests of The Literary Revolution, and your kindness will
be appreciated by

                       JOHN B. ALDEN, Publisher,
                                                393 Pearl St., New York.




                          Transcriber's Notes


--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.

--Provided an original cover image, for free and unrestricted use with
  this Distributed Proofreaders-Canada eBook.

--Only in the text versions, delimited italicized text in _underscores_
  (the HTML version reproduces the font form of the printed book.)









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ALDEN CATALOGUE OF CHOICE BOOKS, MAY 30, 1889 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.