[Illustration:

  _J. W. Langley_,
  (Late Colonel of the 125th Volunteer Infantry.)
]




                           The 125th Regiment
                      Illinois Volunteer Infantry.
                          Attention Battalion!


[Illustration]

                          BY ROBERT M. ROGERS,

                      Late Second Sergeant Co. B.

                            CHAMPAIGN, ILL.
                          GAZETTE STEAM PRINT.
                                 1882.




                            _To the Memory_

                               —OF THOSE—

                       Officers and Enlisted Men,

              Who leaving the endearments and comforts of
      home, willingly came at their country's call to her service,
                and on her altar yielded up their lives,
              this book is affectionately dedicated by the

                                                                 AUTHOR.




                             INTRODUCTION.


  COMRADES AND FRIENDS:

In presenting to you this record of our military life and of the time we
passed in the service of the Government, we have done it with the hope
that our efforts will be appreciated by you. Our desire has been to make
this a record, which we can leave behind us after we are gone, to those
who may come after us. We have done our best to make it reliable and
correct. There may be mistakes in it—undoubtedly there are; but the
general statements are correct, we know, while the incidents recounted
are true, as many of you will aver after you have read them. We have had
to labor under great difficulties in preparing for your inspection and
benefit these pages, and at times have almost become discouraged, but we
persevered, and at last succeeded in getting them into a shape which we
thought would warrant us in placing them in the hands of the printer,
and distributing them among you. Between the covers of the book you will
find not only a record of our marches, battles, and bivouacs, but also a
complete roster of the Regiment, showing what became of every man who,
on the 3rd day of September, 1862, was mustered into the service of the
United States in the 125th Illinois; whether he died on the field of
battle, was taken prisoner, transferred to other organizations, or was
mustered out with the Regiment at Chicago, when only 343 of the original
one thousand who filled the Regiment when we left home, answered to
their names. If he is buried in any Government Cemetery, the number of
his grave is given. Hoping that our endeavors to make, for the regiment,
a record which shall be not only valuable but also entertaining, and one
which shall meet with your approbation, we place it in your hands for
perusal.

But be assured that not one word has been written in these pages with
the intention of wounding any one's feelings in the least. Far from it!
We have too much good feeling for those lads who with us marched through
"Dixie," to do anything to give them pain.

Again, hoping you will be pleased with our endeavors we remain

                                                Yours Truly,

                                                       ROBERT M. ROGERS.

[Illustration]




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                CHAPTER I

  The organization of the Regiment—Rendezvous at Danville—We start for
    Cincinnati, etc., etc.

                                CHAPTER II

  Arrival at Cincinnati—Camp in the corn-stalk huts at Covington,
    Kentucky—Incidents of Camp Life, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER III

  First night on picket—Asleep on post—Shooting at Capt. Fellows by
    picket—Receiving the mules necessary for transportation—Incidents
    connected therewith, etc., etc.

                                CHAPTER IV

  Down the Ohio to Louisville, Kentucky—Arrival of Buell's army—Camp
    on river bank—Removal to the cattle-pen, etc., etc.

                                CHAPTER V

  Our lessons in soldiering just begun—The Brigade formed—The
    appearance of Louisville at this time—Futile endeavors to get
    discharged by some of our warriors, etc., etc.

                                CHAPTER VI

  We leave Louisville for the South—Foraging—Sickness in the
    regiment—First death in Co. B., etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER VII

  Interview with Sheridan—We reach Bardstown—Locked up—Speedy release,
    etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER VIII

  Battle of Perrysville—Incidents of the fight—The Regiment's "baptism
    of fire"—First bayonet charge, etc., etc.

                                CHAPTER IX

  Reflections on the battle of Perrysville—Arrival at night of the
    supply train—A ramble over the battle-field—Scenes and incidents,
    etc., etc.

                                CHAPTER X

  March to Crab Orchard—Description of the country—Blankets and
    knapsacks—Missing—How Doc. McElroy lost his blanket, etc., etc.

                                CHAPTER XI

  The march to, and arrival at, Bowling Green—Relinquishment of
    Buell's command of the army to Genl. Rosecrans—Better hopes—First
    issue of the army hat, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XII

  We reach Edgefield—Another interview with Sheridan—Sales of coffee,
    etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XIII

  First inspection—New kind of ammunition—Our hopes not
    realized—Description of condition of Nashville as left by the
    rebel army, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XIV

  In camp on the hills—Cotton bale breastworks—Tents issued to
    us—Visitors from God's country—The theatres—Stores and hotels,
    etc., etc.

                                CHAPTER XV

  Garrison duty at Nashville—Battle of Stone River—Description of the
    battle, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XVI

  Court Martial in camp—The culprit's revenge—Corp. Duncan's interview
    with the captain at the Custom House, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XVII

  Arrival of the Pay Master—Emancipation Proclamation—We receive our
    dog tents, etc., etc.

                              CHAPTER XVIII

  March to Murfreesboro'—Arrive at Lavergne—Appearance of
    Murfreesboro'—Granger orders some of the boys to be flogged, but
    is restrained, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XIX

  March to Reed's Bridge—Run into rebel wagon train—Almost trapped—The
    battle of Chickamauga, etc., etc.

                                CHAPTER XX

  Farewell of Genl. Rosecrans—"Pap" Thomas assumes command—Caldwell's
    Ford—Scarcity of rations, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XXI

  An unusual reveille—Death of the Chaplain—Battle of Missionary
    Ridge.

                               CHAPTER XXII

  Battle of Missionary Ridge continued—Defeat of the rebels—March to
    Knoxville, etc., etc.

                              CHAPTER XXIII

  Assault on Kenesaw—Death of the Colonel—Visit to the hospital—Scenes
    connected therewith—Incidents of personal bravery, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XXIV

  The cracker-box fortification—Mining the rebel works—Description of
    Cheatham and Hindman, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XXV

  The move to the right—Marietta evacuated—The Union Army masters
    north and west of the Chattahoochie, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XXVI

  Atlanta—Sherman's letter vindicating his order—Of the removal of
    citizens, etc., etc.

                              CHAPTER XXVII

  Destruction of Atlanta—We start for the sea—Occupation of
    Milledgville—Joy of the contrabands, etc., etc.

                              CHAPTER XXVIII

  Our stay at Savannah—Appearance of the city—Chuck-a-luck—Visit to
    the Wissahicken, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XXIX

  Still at Savannah—Oysters and fresh fish—Commencement of the
    campaign through South Carolina—Foraging—Destruction of Columbia,
    etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XXX

  Cheraw—The dash on our cavalry by Hampton—Battle of Averysboro' and
    Bentonville—Occupation of Goldsboro'.

                               CHAPTER XXXI

  Again on the move—News of Lee's surrender—After Johnson "red
    hot"—The convention for his surrender, etc., etc.

                              CHAPTER XXXII

  The news reaches us of the death of the President—Feeling of the
    army—Basis of agreement for Johnston's surrender.

                              CHAPTER XXXIII

  The rejection by the Cabinet of the terms—Johnston is notified that
    Sherman "will move on him in forty-eight hours"—Arrival of General
    Grant, etc., etc.

                              CHAPTER XXXIV

  The final surrender—Arrival at Richmond—March to
    Washington—Departure for Chicago, etc., etc.

                               CHAPTER XXXV

  Arrival at Chicago—Reception at Union Hall—Speeches of T. B. Ryan,
    Esq., General Sherman, and Colonel Langley, etc., etc.

                         MISCELLANEOUS SKETCHES.

  Rome. A Confederate Christmas. Bad meat. Public execution at
    Nashville. Drawing rations. Blue Ridge. Raids on the suttler. John
    Kirsch and Tom Makemson's rice trip. Mrs. Dr. Mary Walker. The
    Monkly fox. Roast goose or gander. The rescued negroes. Our trip
    after Forrest. Personal mention. Lt. Geo. Scroggs, Sergt. S. C.
    Abbott, Lt. John J. White. Our color Bearers, Asbury D. Finlay,
    Harvey S. Tryon, Sergt. Wm. L. Thralls. Resolutions on the
    Emancipation Proclamation. Resolutions passed by Senate and House
    of Representatives of the State of Louisiana. Order announcing
    suspension of hostilities. Order for Grand Review at Richmond.
    General Sherman's farewell order to the Army. Regimental report of
    the Atlanta campaign. Regimental report from the fall of Atlanta
    to the fall of Savannah. Regimental report of Colonel Langley from
    leaving Savannah until the battle of Bentonville. Regimental
    report of Captain Cook during and after the battle of Bentonville,
    to Goldsboro, N. C. Roster of Commissioned Officers. Roster of
    enlisted men, giving the fate of every man, if buried in soldiers'
    cemetery, the number of his grave. Brigade reports. Lee and
    Gordon's Mills to Atlanta, Atlanta, Florence and Savannah,
    Troublefield Swamps or Bentonville, N. C.




                               CHAPTER I.


The One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Regiment, Illinois Volunteer Infantry,
was mustered into the service of the United States, on the third day of
September, Eighteen Hundred and Sixty Two, to serve for three years or
during the war. The Regiment was made up in the counties of Champaign
and Vermilion. Champaign furnishing three companies and Vermilion seven.
These companies averaged ninety men each; making a total of nine hundred
men, rank and file. The Regiment came into the field under the call for
"three hundred thousand more," to assist in putting down what had been
familiarly called by some, a "tempest in a tea pot." Four years of
bloody strife, and millions of treasure, proved that it was the most
tumultuous "tea pot tempest," that ever was heard of in this or any
other land. The companies rendezvoused at Danville, the county seat of
Vermilion County, and went into camp on the old "Fair Grounds,"
utilizing the sheds and booths that had been put up there for the
exhibition of cattle, sheep, etc. Here it was that comparative order was
obtained out of chaos. The companies were composed of men in the prime
of life, who had, for the most part, been engaged in farming, and were
used to out-door life; the best material to make soldiers of that could
be procured in any land. The commander of the Regiment was Oscar F.
Harmon, a young and promising lawyer of Danville; the Lieut. Colonelcy
was filled by J. W. Langley, of Champaign, who was also a member of the
bar. The Major was John B. Lee, of Vermilion, a civil engineer by
profession; while from the busy marts of trade came the Adjutant, Wm.
Mann, of Danville. The Surgeon was John J. McElroy, of Vermilion; the
Assistant Surgeon, C. H. Mills, of Champaign; the Chaplain, Levi
Sanders, of Vermilion, while from Champaign came the Quartermaster, A.
M. Ayres. The companies were officered as follows:

Co. _A_. Capt. Clark Ralston; 1st. Lt. Jackson Charles; 2nd. Lt.
Harrison Low; Enlisted men, eighty-six.

Co. _B_. Capt. Robt. Stewart; 1st. Lt. W. R. Wilson; 2nd. Lt. S. D.
Connover; Enlisted men, eighty-eight.

Co. _C_. Capt. W. W. Fellows; 1st. Lt. Alexander Pollock; 2nd. Lt. Jas.
D. New; Enlisted men, eighty-eight.

Co. _D_. Capt. Geo. W. Galloway; 1st. Lt. Jas. B. Stevens; 2nd. Lt. John
L. Jones; Enlisted men, eighty-six.

Co. _E_. Capt. N. M. Clark; 1st. Lt. W. G. Isom; 2nd. Lt. John Urquhart;
Enlisted men, eighty-seven.

Co. _F_. Capt. F. B. Sale; 1st. Lt. John B. Lester; 2nd. Lt. Alfred
Johnson; Enlisted men, ninety-two.

Co. _G_. Capt. John H. Gass; 1st. Lt. Eph. S. Howell; 2nd. Lt. Josiah
Lee; Enlisted men, ninety.

Co. _H_. Capt. P. M. Parks; 1st. Lt. D. A. Brenton; 2nd. Lt. J. C.
Harbor; Enlisted men, eighty-six.

Co. _I_. Capt. Levin Vinson; 1st. Lt. John E. Vinson; 2nd. Lt. Stephen
Brothers; Enlisted men, ninety-six.

Co. _K_. Capt. Geo. W. Cook; 1st. Lt. Oliver P. Hunt; 2nd. Lt. Joseph F.
Crosby; Enlisted men, one hundred and two.

Life in camp at Danville, was passed as camp life usually is. The
regular routine of guard duty, drilling, etc., etc., until one evening
at "Dress Parade," our Colonel informed us that we would break camp, and
leave for Cincinnati on the following day, and that the number of our
Regiment was the One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth. We had been furnished,
while in camp, with everything that was necessary for a soldier in the
field, excepting tents. The arms which were given us were what were
called the "Austrian Rifle," and a poor arm they were. Some of them were
not entirely drilled out, and any quantity of them had springs that
would not snap a cap, nor on which a bayonet could be fastened without
hammering. If we were merely going out for a picnic or a procession, the
Regiment was splendidly equipped, but if we were bound for the front, it
would have been a matter of little difficulty for a small force of the
enemy to have routed us, unless we were given a chance to use the
"butts" of our guns, for in that shape only would they have been
reliable.

At this stage of the war, when the private soldier received but thirteen
dollars per. month, it was patriotism, and not a desire for wealth, that
filled the ranks of the Union Army. So, with fifes and drums playing the
old tune to which so many have marched to their graves, "The Girl I left
behind me," and with our banners gaily floating on the breeze, we
started for the seat of war. A train of cattle cars was to be our
conveyance, and on them we clambered. The usual scenes, incident to the
departure of a Regiment from home, took place: wives parting from their
husbands, children from their fathers and fathers from their children;
all phases of the human heart were to be seen there. The lingering clasp
of the fond wife, the last kiss of the children, the hearty hand shake
and a "God speed you, and bring you back safe" of a friend; the men
trying to hide their emotions with a forced smile or witty saying. But
at last "all aboard," the engine whistled, the bell rang, and amid the
cheers of the crowd, away we went, some to their graves. Oh! how many?
The rest of us to return at the expiration of the war, for that was the
term of our enlistment. Looking back from this late day, the scenes, the
events, the recollections of that time, are as bright and vivid in the
mind of the writer, as if they had transpired but yesterday. I know not
how it was with other companies in the Regiment, but in the one to which
the writer belonged, only one man showed the "white feather," at the
last moment. He was left laying on the floor of "Floral Pavilion" in the
"Fair Grounds," according to his own language, "so sick he did not know
what to do." He may have been so, or he may not; at any rate there was
not much sympathy shown for him, as we marched off leaving him there,
the sole inhabitant of the place.

We have taken rides on the cars which were much more enjoyable, much
more comfortable, than that night ride from Danville to LaFayette. The
weather was pleasant, however, and there was a full moon; but the cars
had no tops, and our eyes were filled with the smoke and cinders from
the engine. We thought it the extreme of hardship, and an insult to pack
us away like dumb brutes, on such cars; but before we again saw that
road, we had seen the time we would have been only too glad to have a
chance to ride that way. But we were young, in the prime of life, and
our hearts were cheered with the thought that we were doing our duty,
and so with laugh and song we whiled away the hours until we arrived at
Cincinnati.




                              CHAPTER II.


It was on a Sabbath morning, when our train finally stopped, and we were
ordered to disembark, and fall into line. The weather was intensely
warm. Now, I want to say right here, that if ever I have to order a
Regiment of men into the field, in the summer time, and that Regiment is
bound for a southern climate, I will not think it necessary to provide
them with overcoats, like we were, for we had them issued to us before
we left Danville, and thought we had to take them. So there we stood in
line, the hot sun pouring down his rays on our heads; our eyes sore from
cinders and the loss of sleep; with our accoutrements upon us, and
everybody as ill-natured, as might be expected, and no wonder. Oh! how
slow the moments went by, it seemed to us hours, but at last the command
rings out "Attention Battalion," "Take Arms," "Right Dress," "Right
Face," "Forward march," and away we went, the band playing and the flags
flying, across the Pontoon Bridge, over the Ohio, into the city of
Covington, and the "neutral" state of Kentucky. Marching men, or
regulating the gait of a horse to the step of new recruits, was
something our worthy Colonel was sadly ignorant of, and it was not to be
wondered at, for it was a new business to him. His horse walked too fast
for us, and the consequence was that when he arrived at our camp he had
but a "corporal's guard" following him. The remainder of the Regiment
was scattered like sheep along the way we had come.

The writer and his partner stopped at what had once been a "Beer
Garden," and on the tables which had once resounded to the clink of
glasses, and which were placed around the enclosure in the shade of the
trees, we deposited our weary bodies, and wished we were—at home.
Without intending to throw any blame whatever, on the character or
motives of our worthy Colonel, covering him with the excuse that he was
totally ignorant of the art of "marching men," we must give it as our
candid opinion that the march from Cincinnati to our camp on the hills
back of Covington, did an injury to the rank and file of the Regiment,
from which it never recovered, and which was the remote cause of death
to some, and to others of lasting injury. Our camp was situated, truly,
at a lofty elevation. We were placed in the Corn Stalk shelters which
the "Squirrel Hunters" had occupied when Bragg had threatened Cincinnati
with his forces, and who, at the call of the Governor of Ohio, had
flocked to the standard of the Union, with their squirrel rifles, and
their shot guns, to drive back the rebel hordes, and to maintain the old
Flag, with their life blood if need be. They came from the prairie and
the wood-land, in such numbers that the Governor was compelled to issue
another proclamation, that no more were needed. Into the shelters which
they had made from corn stalks, gathered from the fields contiguous, and
which were models of skill and ingenuity, showing that the American, as
a man, is equal to almost any emergency, our Regiment was marched, and
quarters allotted to each company. Oh! those terrible hills, the like we
had never seen before. We were prairie men; our homes had been in a
level country, but here it was just the reverse, and it seemed to us as
if we had ascended to the very heights. The Ohio rolled beneath us, and
from its bosom we had to procure the water that was necessary for our
use. How many lies were told to get out of the job of carrying water up
to camp, or how many oaths were uttered by those who undertook the job,
driven to it by necessity, the writer cannot pretend to state, but it
was a hard journey, and the consequence was that water became to us, for
once, _valuable_, and many was the raid that was made, under cover of
the night, to some fellow's mess kettle, that had been filled to cook
his breakfast with in the morning. But we enjoyed it all, after we had
gotten over our march to get there, and soon the camp was alive with fun
and frolic. We had nothing much to do but cook our food, drill, and
police the camp grounds, and occasionally go on picket; and so we passed
the days away, wondering where we would go to next, writing letters home
and doing all in our power to make the time pass pleasantly.

Here it was an incident happened that was ludicrous in the extreme. It
was the custom of the picket guard, when returning to camp every
morning, to discharge their guns by volley, under command of a
commissioned officer, at or into the foot of the hill on which our camp
was situated. On this morning, to which we have reference, the pickets
had been relieved and returned to camp, and as was their custom, had
assembled at the foot of the hill to discharge their pieces. At the
command of their officer there was a volley, and from some cause or
other the bullets came whizzing over our heads, filling the air with
that buzzing sound, which is so familiar to the old soldier, but which
sounds like a death knell to the raw recruit. What a scattering to and
fro there was, when those leaden missiles came whizzing through the air,
what a falling to the ground, and hugging of mother earth was there
witnessed. We thought the "Johnnies" had come sure enough; our minds
were instantly filled with the accounts we had read of "surprises,"
"ambuscades," and the idea that the enemy were right on hand, seemed to
have filled the minds of many. That scene will never be forgotten by
those who are how living, and who witnessed it. It was a terrible
"give-away" on the courage and soldierly qualities of at least one
company in the One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Infantry. But we were indeed
"infants" in the art of war. And to have seen what followed when it was
definitely ascertained as to where the bullets came from, was ludicrous
in the extreme. To see a big, brawny fellow who had fallen to the
ground, to all appearances as dead as a log, raise up his head and
enquire of his nearest neighbor, why _he_ was laying _there_! What in
thunder was the reason that, if he felt like laying down, every body
else must lay down, too!! Get up and leave me alone now, or I'll hurt
somebody!! And to see how quietly these prostrate forms would assume
life and locomotion, and glide away into their corn stalk huts; and then
at night, after the affair had cooled down somewhat, to listen, as we
sat around our camp fires, to each one as he described what his
sensations were at the time, seems to us, at this late day, to be just
as comical as it was then. But oh! how they redeemed themselves, in
after days, from any stigma of cowardice this may have cast upon them;
how they faced the enemy and met death as only brave men can, the hearts
of those who survived the fray in the years that came after, can bear
witness. All honor to them, our neighbor boys, our true and tried
friends.




                              CHAPTER III.


But in looking back over the time we staid there on those "everlasting
hills," memory recalls to us one stormy night, when neither moon nor
star gave forth its light, when the heavens were draped in the blackest
of darkness, when the wind blew with the force of a hurricane, and our
corn stalk shelters were scattered far and wide; when the elements
seemed to have combined to extemporize, for us, an entertainment of the
grandest description, but which was to be enjoyed vastly more by the
in-dwellers of good substantial houses, than we who had for our only
covering a roof of corn stalks. But amid all this din and clash of the
elements, came the order for an additional force to strengthen the
picket guard. It was rumored about that the rebel Gen. John Morgan was
in the neighborhood and was going to make a dash on our lines. Whether
it was the fact, whether it was a "camp-rumor," or whether it was an
_honest_ alarm, we never found out. But there was the order all the
same, and it must be complied with. The order called for a detail of
three men from each company. The writer and two comrades were the ones
who were called on from Co. "B." Gathering our guns and accoutrements
was but the work of a moment, and away we went to report at Regimental
Headquarters. The night was so dark that we could not discern our file
leader, and so an attachment was made to the coat tail of the fellow in
front. Down the hill we went, stumbling, and falling, over rocks and
clods, until we reached a road. On this we were stationed, three men on
a post, with orders for one of us to keep awake. The three to which the
writer belonged were stationed at the foot of a large tree; the
countersign given us in a whisper; the remainder of the detail marched
off; and there we were! on picket! and to our excited imagination the
enemy in countless numbers all around us. The night, as we have before
stated, was intensely dark, but down on this road, at the foot of the
high hills on which we were stationed, the wind did not strike with such
fury, and any unusual noise could be plainly heard. There we stood at
the foot of that large tree, determined, as we agreed among ourselves,
to do our whole duty if matters came to the worst. Suddenly on the night
air came the sound of a foot-fall, near; nearer; we held a short
consultation, it might be an enemy, no doubt it was; well, we must find
out. "Halt!" rang out on the night air. "Who comes there?" back came the
answer, "A Friend." This was an assurance most acceptable to us.
"Advance, friend, and give the countersign," and up came Capt. Fellows,
of Co. "C," who was the officer of the guard. A short whispered
consultation, a reminder from the Captain of how to perform our duty,
and he passed on down the road to the next post. He had been gone but a
little while when "bang" went a gun, and the bullet went whistling over
our heads. What did that mean? We cocked our rifles and stood on the
defensive, and it would have been terrible trouble for any one who had
come our way just then. The whiz of the bullet died away, naught was
heard, and we uncocked our guns and sat down, but not long, for again we
heard the foot-fall on the road, coming from the direction which the
Captain had taken when he left us; nearer it approaches, and again the
word "Halt!" rings out on the night air. Back comes the response, "It's
all right, don't act the fool as the man did on the post below." We
brought our guns down and up came the Captain. "What gun was that Cap?"
was our first enquiry. "Why," he replied, "the man on post below you was
laying on the ground, and when he heard me coming, cried 'Halt!' and
banged away, he came near hitting me too." Of course the usual amount of
expletives were indulged in by each of us, making them as strong as the
case seemed to require, and the Captain passed on. The articles of war
declare that death shall be the penalty for that soldier who goes to
sleep while on post; we knew it, it had been told to us, but if John
Morgan, with his command, had driven in our pickets in the early gray of
that morning, we are strongly inclined to the opinion, that at a certain
post on that picket line the guard would have been found sleeping the
sleep of the innocent and just. Yes, it is a fact Morpheus had wooed to
his embrace, the entire three who occupied the picket post at the foot
of that large tree. The reader who scans these pages must please bear in
mind that we were "babes" in the art of war, at this time; we had come
from our homes and from our farms only a few short weeks before, and the
scenes in which we were now playing a part were of the veriest newness
to us. We had entered into the service of our country in good faith, we
had sworn allegiance to our flag under any and all circumstances, more
as a form than anything else as far as our hearts were concerned, but we
had not as yet arrived at that period in a soldier's life, when he finds
that eternal vigilance is not only the price of liberty, but of his own
life also. Morning came at last and with the rest of our comrades we
were marched back to camp. We came as "conquerors come," we had stood
during the night as an invincible band against our foes. That was,
perhaps, what was thought of us in camp, but we knew how we had stood,
and were going to keep it to ourselves most decidedly, at any rate we
were willing to let "some of you fellows" try it the next time. We had
been in camp now on those "everlasting hills," that is, as near as the
writer can explain his sentiments about them, for several weeks, but it
was not for the business merely of laying on top of them and basking in
the sun that the Government had called for our assistance, and which we
had almost come to believe was the extent to which the Government had
invoked our aid. Oh! no, the Government meant business, and so
accordingly one afternoon we received orders to "strike tents," that is
what the bugle said, but we had no tents to strike; true there was a
remnant of our corn-stalk homes, but the most of them had been scattered
by the winds. Well, any way, the bugle call was to us the notice to pack
up and fall into line. This we did, and away we marched, leaving our
hills, our corn-stalk castles and many other remembrances behind us.
Down the "pike" we went to the music of our band, to the steamboat
landing, where we found two steamers waiting for us. But we have omitted
one incident of our soldier days, when in camp at Covington, and if we
had not gotten down to the boats we would have left it out, perhaps,
altogether, and if we had, the historical record of the 125th Ills.
would have been very incomplete, and so in order that it may be a true
record, as near as we can make it, we must not omit this part of it. We
have reference to the transportation outfit of the Regiment. Of course
when we arrived at our camp at Covington, the only transportation there
was, consisted of each man carrying on his back whatever earthly goods
he was the possessor of. We had no animals of any kind, excepting the
horses of the Colonel and his staff, but here at Covington we were to
obtain that most useful, and at the same time most singular quadruped,
the _mule_. If I thought myself able I would write an eulogy on that
animal, but it is useless to think of that, I can not do it; suffice it
then to say that in our humble opinion, the mule with all his
eccentricities, played a most important part in the war of the
rebellion. A willing servant; too much so we often thought, ready at all
times to do his part, whether in pulling in the collar, or packing on
his back, strapped on so tight that it was as much as he could do to
obtain his regular amount of air necessary for breathing purposes, an
almost innumerable amount of blankets, tin pans, pots, roosters, niggers
and all the paraphernalia of camp life, or of sending by a quick and
powerful discharge of his hind feet a warrior to the hospital, or to the
happy hunting grounds, the mule will ever bear an honorable name in the
records of the great war. So much for the mule, he was honest, and we
must be. But to our narrative. An order came, one morning, to detail
from each company a man to drive the company team of six mules. What
visions of ease opened up to our minds. "What! is that all they want a
fellow to do, drive a team? I'm in for that, here Cap., I'll go, yes so
will I and I and I." Thus the strain rang out, until it was much to be
feared that the 125th were mule drivers, not only by inclination, but by
"previous condition of servitude." Well, at length the detail was
complete, and two men from each company, in charge of a commissioned
officer, proceeded to Covington to procure the number of mules necessary
for the transportation of the Regiment. Twenty men, in the vigor and
prime of life, refusing numerous offers of ten dollars apiece for their
job, with hearts elate and with buoyant feelings trudged off down the
pike rejoicing in their opportunities. The sequel, kind reader! They
returned, yes they returned in the evening the maddest set of men that
Covington's green hills had seen for many a day; the maimed, the halt,
the lame, and we were going to say the blind, but the storm had not been
quite that severe. Every mule in each team, with the exception perhaps
of one to the team, were as ignorant of restraint as when in blissful
happiness it sucked its dam in the old home pasture. The men who had
been detailed for teamsters found the animals in a "corral," the
Quartermaster of the Post, with his helpers, in attendance. The mules
were as wild as buffaloes on their native plains, and were caught by the
lasso, and dragged out, and turned over to the man who had been detailed
to drive and care for them. When the whole number necessary for our use
were secured the receipt of our Regimental Quartermaster paid the bill.
The next question and the most intricate one, perhaps, that had ever
stirred the souls of these detailed warriors was, what shall we do with
them? There was the harness, there was the Government wagons, with their
broad tires and a lock chain on each side. The question was solved, they
must be hitched to those wagons and hitched they were, and up to camp
they came, with every wagon wheel locked and two men to each mule. The
word soon spread through the camp, the teams are coming! our teams! and
we all flocked to the road side to see them. We will carry this thing no
farther, but will leave the reader to imagine the rest. We can see them,
as we pen these lines, as they appeared to us the next morning, as we
stood by and witnessed the harnessing of these Government mules. Their
shoulders were a little sore from pulling the heavy wagons, with locked
wheels, up to camp, and their ears were chafed by the bridles, and the
general sensation was something new to them altogether, and perhaps
visions of the old pasture lot at home, where they had kicked up their
heels in mulish joy, flashed before their eyes; at any rate, whatever
may have been the cause, the hills of Covington never before, and we
will venture the assertion, never will again echo back the like of the
noise that was made there on the morning when the teamsters of the 125th
Ills. essayed to hitch up the teams, which the Government had furnished
to transport us and our belongings into the land of the Southron and the
chivalry. The braying of the mules, the curses of the drivers, the
cracking of the whips, all combined, served to make a noise the like of
which had never been heard before in those parts.




                              CHAPTER IV.


The geography of our country tells us, that the Ohio is a broad river;
that, we are willing to admit, and rather than be thought narrow minded,
we are willing to say that it is a beautiful river, but when the writer,
with his heart filled with patriotism, entrusted himself on its bosom,
it was blessed with a remarkable shallowness, at any rate our boats kept
getting fast on sand bars, shoals, mud or something else, so often, that
it would have been no trouble for us all to have crawled off and footed
it down the stream, or back home, but that kind of a boat ride would
have had its inconveniences, and that was not what we had come for, so
like 'Cassabianca,' whom we used to read about in our school days, we
clung to the "burning deck." "Down the river, down the river, down the
Ohio," we crawled along, until night fall, when for prudence sake our
captain steered into the bank and tied up for the night. Can it be
possible, we think, while sitting here penning these lines with peace
all around us, that between the cities of Cincinnati and Louisville a
steamboat Captain was afraid, after night, to take his craft for fear of
enemies? Such, however, was the case, and history will bear record to
the generations yet to come, that in the nineteenth century this grand
river was navigable only in the day time with comparative safety. But we
do not want to let our pen run away with our own private thoughts; we do
not want to let our individual feelings get the upper hand, we are
endeavoring to write a history, and we want it to be correct; we want it
to be a history that each and every member of the 125th Ills. can leave
behind him when he "strikes his tent" for the last time; a history that
he may leave to those who come after him, that in the terrible war which
the Nation went through, when right against wrong prevailed, that he was
a partaker in the struggle. What better, handsomer, nobler record can we
leave to our posterity?

Our trip down the river was not prolific of any incident that would be
noticeable here, suffice it to say that we awoke in the morning to hear
the chug! chug! of the boat and knew that we were moving, and that we
had not been interfered with during the night. We arrived at Louisville
that evening and disembarked on the river bank; but little did we think
as we stepped off the boat that there, on the banks of the Ohio, we were
to receive our first lesson of what a soldier's life would be. Our past
experience we thought had been terrible, but the corn-stalk huts which
we had occupied, and laughed at, would have been welcome to us now. The
stones on the river bank made our couch, and the canopy of heaven our
covering. But for fear that history may not give us our right place, and
to show that our hearts beat in unison, we will mention that here it was
we met the army of General Buell. It arrived in Louisville the same
night that we did, fresh from the battle fields of Corinth and Iuka, and
had come to the relief of the endangered city. Northern manhood,
Northern "grit," was too much for the sluggish blood of Bragg's army,
and our boys beat them in the race and saved the city of Louisville.
Never can those who witnessed it, forget that sight. Here they came,
neighbor boys, old friends, who had left home only a few months prior to
us; covered with the dust and stain of travel, no baggage, no
impediments, nothing but their trusty Enfields, and sixty rounds of
ammunition in their cartridge boxes, with a blanket to each man rolled
up in a coil, and fastened around him, this was all they had, while we,
in our clean, blue clothes, with thoughts of our having gone through
with an awful experience, met these lads. The impression the writer
received that night as we witnessed these boys come marching in, was
like the opinion that was expressed by some one in our Regiment: "Boys,
we don't know anything about soldiering." Morning found us asleep on the
banks of the Ohio, with the river rolling past us, down to that country
which never before, in the history of the Nation, had been forbidden
ground to any of her sons. But to that land we were bound, and if we
remained on the banks of the Ohio we would never get there, so when the
bugle sounded the call to "fall in," we were ready to obey the signal.
The morning opened bright and cheerful, but towards noon the sun was
overcast by clouds, and a drizzling rain set in; but it made no
difference to us; of course they could not find lodgings for us _that_
night, but now they had awakened to a sense of their duty, and we were
going to some hotel to put up. Yes, certainly that was what was the
matter, and we fell into ranks with glee. Our hotel was a cattle pen in
the suburbs of the city, and into it we marched.

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER V.


Our lessons in the life of a soldier were just commencing. Our new camp
was, as we have stated, an old cattle pen or corral, and had at one time
been surrounded with a good substantial plank fence, now, however, the
only enclosure it had was a camp guard. In this place we found three
other Regiments, all new recruits like ourselves. The 85th and 86th
Ills., and the 52nd Ohio. With these Regiments we were Brigaded, and
remained so until the close of the war, the command being given to Col.
Dan'l McCook of the 52nd Ohio, who had smelt powder on Shiloh's bloody
field.

The rain, which had been a continuous drizzle, now assumed larger
proportions, and came down in regular and persistent style. We had no
tents, and of course were entirely without protection, but the American
soldier is not a man to long remain uncomfortable, when it is in his
power to prevent it, so from the fences adjacent, in spite of the guard,
we procured some lumber and soon built shelters from the storm. The next
day we were moved to a better camp, for the rain had rendered the old
cattle yard entirely unfit for use, if it ever had been. But Louisville
at this time was crowded with soldiers, camp followers, and all that
goes to sustain the life, and corrupt the morals of a large army. The
streets daily resounded to the tramp of marching feet, and the hurrying
hither and thither of General officers, members of their staff, and
mounted orderlies bearing dispatches to the different headquarters
through the city. The blare of the bugle, the braying of mules, the
thundering of artillery wheels, from the earliest dawn, until far into
the night, were reminders that the General of the Army was fully alive
to his trust, and was endeavoring to organize the forces under his
command into a shape that would render them manageable. As far as duty
was concerned, there was not much required of us, so we passed the time
making visits to old acquaintances in the 25th, 35th, 37th and 88th
Ills. Regiments which had come up with Buell from the South. But at last
the order came for moving. Everything was ready and we were to open up
the ball which ended at the fall of Richmond, and the surrender of Joe.
Johnston's Army in North Carolina.

The weather was very warm, but so far, no sickness of any great moment
had appeared among us, but of course there was some to answer the
surgeon's call, and receive their allowance of the good things he had
for them. We do not wish to cast any imputation on the medical branch of
the army, far from it. We are firm in the opinion that no army, either
in the fighting nations of Europe, or in any other land, ever had a
medical corps that could surpass our own in skill, dexterity, genuine
humanity, and a desire to do their whole duty, but it did seem to us
that quinine was the sheet anchor of their faith, and so it came to be a
standing joke, that quinine would cure all diseases to which our bodies
might be subject. On this morning, to which memory carries us back,
orders were given that reports of all who were sick, or in any way
disabled from marching, should be made out and forwarded to Regimental
headquarters, in order that they might be sent to hospital, or if
totally unfit for soldier life, to be discharged. We are of the opinion
still, and was at the time, that many men were mustered into the service
of the government, when our Regiment was organized, who were not fit for
the hardships and privations of army life, especially for active service
in the field, and this was owing to what seemed to us, the careless
examination made by the mustering officer. We were never examined by a
surgeon, as to bodily capacity. The only examination made was for each
man, as his name was called, to step out three paces and show his teeth
to the officer. The consequence was that when orders came for us to
leave Louisville, there were a great many who had to be discharged,
because totally unfit for soldier's life, and many also who had to be
sent to hospital. Others there were, who would have been perfectly
willing to have returned home, entirely satisfied with soldiering, if
they could only have had the opportunity. One case the writer remembers
which had a very ludicrous side to it, and we will insert it here. There
were two members of the Company to which we belonged, who were both
satisfied entirely with their share of glory, and were willing to resign
their positions as "high privates" to almost any one who wanted it. One
of these however, would be discharged, owing to his inability to march
(this was before the day of the invalid corps) by reason of a severe cut
he had at one time received in the foot from an ax, the other boy was a
fit subject for powder, but the patriotism which had filled his bosom,
when he enlisted had died out. He had gotten all the glory he wanted and
"Home—sweet—Home" was ringing in his ears. However, a discharge, in his
eyes, was something worth trying for at least, so he approached the
fellow who, by reason of his lameness, was to be discharged, and the
following colloquy ensued:

"Say, John, I want to get a discharge, how shall I manage it, can't you
help a fellow?"

"Get discharged! Why that's easy enough, I can get one for you."

"Can you? What'll you take to get it?"

"What'll I take? Why nothing. You go and get a pass for us to go down
town and I'll go to the medical director of the Post and soon fix you
out all right."

Away went the ex-patriot and soon returned with a pass and off they went
to call on the medical director. Going along the street says John to his
companion:

"Say, Ide! got any money?"

"Yes, a little."

John called a halt. "Well now, old fellow, I'll tell you, if I had a
little whisky I could talk a heap better to the doctor, you know, but I
hain't got a cent of money to buy any."

"Oh, if that's all," says Ide, thinking a discharge from the army for a
drink of whiskey a good enough bargain for him, "I've got money enough
to buy the whisky, where'll we get it?"

"I know, follow me," replied John, and he led him to a place where
liquor could be obtained on the sly, for it was against positive orders
for the citizens to sell any thing of the sort to a soldier, and
Louisville was then under martial law. Into this place they went, and
John having received the magic elixir, which was to open his mouth, and
loosen his tongue, was again ready to accompany his friend to the
doctor. But it was quite a distance from camp to the Director's office,
and before it was reached Ide had been obliged to replenish John's
stomach with whisky more than once. But at last they arrived at the
place.

"Now Ide you stay down here until I go up stairs, I won't be gone long
and when I come back I'll have your discharge."

John was feeling good; the whisky that Ide had furnished him had made
his faith in himself complete, so up the stairs he nimbly skipped,
leaving his friend below on the sidewalk. The office door was reached,
and with an invincible faith in himself, John opened it and walked in.
There was the Medical Director of the Post at his desk, surrounded by
his assistants, while on seats placed around the room, were soldiers who
had come there for treatment. Up to the desk steps John.

"Doctor I want to obtain a discharge for—"

Looking up from his desk in surprise, the Doctor fixed his eyes on our
friend.

"Who are you?" was the enquiry. "Take the position of a soldier sir,"
which John did, wishing he was some place else, for the stern, military
manner of the doctor had somewhat unnerved him, "about face, forward
march," and out of the office marched John. The doctor never gave the
command to "halt," and amid the laughter of those who witnessed the
scene, John took his departure. Down stairs he went to where Ide was
waiting for him.

"Did you get it?" was the first question.

"No" came the reply, "the doctor ain't in, he has gone out of town." So
back they came to camp, but John got no more whisky on the return trip,
and the next day we left Louisville. The story leaked out some way, as
all such stories do, and furnished many a laugh for us. Ide failed in
getting his discharge, but made an excellent soldier afterwards, and
came back safe and sound at the close of the war.




                              CHAPTER VI.


The sun arose on the morning of the Thirtieth of September, 1862, bright
and clear, and as he climbed into the heavens the heat became intense.
At an early hour the Regiment was astir, for we had received marching
orders, the army was going to advance, and so, long before noon the
bugle sounded the Assembly. The line was quickly formed and away we went
our band playing its best music. But we had not gone far until the
"Halt!" was sounded, and it was not until late in the day that we got
clear of the streets of Louisville and out into the open country. It was
a hard day on us, encumbered as we were with so much clothing, for each
man was provided with two suits of underwear, and overcoat, and nothing
is more tiresome than the perpetual halting, and advancing, halting and
advancing, which we were compelled to do that day, owing to the crowded
and jammed condition of the streets, filled as they were with regiments
of infantry, cavalry, batteries of artillery, baggage, and supply
trains, and all and singular that goes to make up the force of a large
army about to take the field.

But at last we were clear of the town, and marching on the open country
road, leaving, however, behind us, several of our comrades who had been
overcome with the heat of the sun and the irksomeness of our movements,
and had fallen in their places in the ranks and been carried off to the
hospital for treatment. We did not go far until our track was lined with
clothing, blankets and other property we had thrown away as being too
cumbersome and hard to carry. We went into camp in a meadow, and as soon
as the order was given to break ranks, many of us flung ourselves on the
ground and never moved from our position until the bugle sounded the
reveille in the morning.

Our soldier life had now fairly commenced, and we were on the march to
that country in which many of our comrades were to find their last
resting places. When the war commenced, Kentucky had declared
neutrality, but we think our statement will be borne out by many, that
the neutrality amounted to nothing. At any rate it was the opinion of us
all, that for a neutral state, Kentucky held many bushwhackers, and
guerillas, who, from behind trees and rocks, murdered our boys whenever
opportunity offered. It was murder, not warfare. Kentucky neutrality was
rebellion in ambush. But Kentucky also had loyal sons, and she gave to
the Union several regiments of brave men. Kentucky had splendid roads,
and as we advanced further into the country we were charmed with the
scenery, and if it had not been for the terrible scarcity of water, we
would have got on very well. Foraging of any kind was strictly
forbidden, but the fruits of the land found their way into camp, all the
same. Honey was plenty, fresh meat and also vegetables, and in spite of
all orders, found their way into camp. There was one boy in our company
who seemed to have, instinctively, a knowledge superior to any one else,
as to where all such things could be obtained. Every night he would
appear in camp ladened down with food that had never been issued from
our regimental commissariat. He was liberal hearted, and distributed his
good things with a lavish hand. But the marching became terrible at
last. The hot sun beating on the "pike," and the air filled with the
heated dust, no water, excepting such as could be obtained from ponds by
the road side, stagnant, and covered with a green slime, and often with
hogs wallowing in it. The springs and wells dried up, all combined to
make our march irksome, and almost unbearable. Camp Diarrhoea made its
appearance from which nearly all suffered more or less. Green
persimmons, white oak bark, and all such simple astringents were used,
but many became very weak and unable to march. The ambulances were full
of sick soldiers, and so indeed were many wagons. Many poor fellows got
discouraged, thoughts of home and loved ones filled their minds, and as
the long days passed away and they lay in the ambulances, their minds
kept wandering back, and nothing could arouse them to make endeavors to
regain their health, so at last death came to many and relieved them of
their sufferings. It was at such times as these, that the boys showed
their hearty good will, that earnest endeavor to help those who could
not help themselves, so characteristic of the western man, and many a
trip was made by some kind hearted lad to houses far from the line of
march, although he knew he was running the risk of losing his own life
in the attempt, to procure a canteen of good water for a sick comrade,
who was slowly but surely loosing his hold on life. The writer well
remembers the feelings that the first death in his own company
occasioned. One of our boys had grown so weak from the effects of the
diarrhoea that he had been placed in one of the ambulances. For several
days he rode thus, and every night when we reached camp some one of our
number would go to the ambulance train to see if he needed anything,
that we could do for him, but one night the messenger returned with the
sad news, that, when the ambulance train went into camp, he was found
dead inside. Yes, poor fellow, his warfare was over, and as we gathered
to our camp fires the news was spread around, a pall of sorrow seemed to
settle down upon us, and Co. "B" went to their blankets with saddened
hearts. But sorrow, like everything else, is evanescent, and before the
next night rolled around, the company had again assumed its usual every
day life and jollity, not that the memory of our lost comrade had faded
from our minds, but on every hand there was to be seen something new to
us, something to excite enquiry, and we were finding now, every day,
traces of war; fences torn down to enable cavalry to charge through,
dead horses, and used up wagons by the road side, which had been
abandoned by the enemy, and destroyed, by cutting the spokes out of the
wheels, so as to be of no use to the "invader." These sights, and many
others, quickly dispelled sorrow, and brought in its place a desire to
meet the foe. We were at this time in the division over which General
Phillip H. Sheridan had command.




                              CHAPTER VII.


Sheridan's name is one which will be forever linked with the history of
our country. He was a brave officer, a dashing leader, but we used to
think the possessor of the most abominable temper that ever man was
blessed or cursed with, and whenever he would ride past with his staff,
the weary legs of the men would straighten up, and for a while a new
life would seem to inspire us. Whether it was that unknown power that
causes some men to be more fitted for the duties of leading men, than
others, or whether it was a fear that we might receive a broadside of
his oaths, we do not know, but at any rate, during the short time he
would ride by, things would assume a more soldierly appearance; a little
more order. We remember one afternoon, when along with a comrade, we had
managed in some way, to drift considerably to the rear. We were plodding
along, however, chatting together, until we came to a sutler who had
opened up his wagon of sutler's goods, and was doing a good business
with the boys as they marched by. We went up and purchased some cheese
and crackers, and placing them in our hats, proceeded to a little mound
at the foot of a large tree, to eat them. There we sat munching our
crackers and cheese, making remarks on the passers by, and occasionally
enjoying a bit of chaff with some fellow, until we began to wonder how
many men there could be coming, for by this time we had been there quite
a while, and still the stream of humanity flowed by, still the same
panorama of infantry, cavalry and artillery, passed before us, and we
had come to the conclusion to stay there until they all went by, never
once thinking of what a time we would have to catch up with our command.
Just at this moment, when we had come to the conclusion to see the end
of it, up rode General Sheridan with his staff and orderlies pressing on
to the front. We were a little fearful he might see us, but we thought
that in all that multitude of humanity and life, we surely were of but
small moment, and would escape his eye. But we were doomed to
disappointment, for suddenly this salutation, short and decidedly to the
point, rang upon our ears: "You men of the 125th Ills., what in —— are
you doing there. Move on;" and filling the air full of the hottest oaths
aimed at our defenseless heads we incontinently gathered up our hats,
with the remnants of our lunch and started for our regiment, which by
this time was far in advance. But as we walked along, we were thinking
how it was that Sheridan knew we were members of the 125th, was it by
any peculiarity in our movements, or was it a part of his business, as
general, to know the members of each regiment in his division. Our
appreciation of his merits as a great commander were rising rapidly, and
we had come to the conclusion that he must have a wonderful memory. So
on we went wondering to each other how it was. Suddenly my companion
stopped short. "Bob," says he, "I know how it was that old Sheridan knew
us."

"How," we asked.

"Why, you old fool, he read it on our knapsacks."

True enough, that was the solution of the problem, for before leaving
Louisville, the writer had procured a bottle of white paint, and a
brush, and had painted in large letters on each fellow's knapsack, his
name, company and regiment. This it was that had revealed to the general
our proper place, we had forgotten all about it. We laughed heartily
over the matter, and agreed to erase from our knapsacks the tell-tale
letters as soon as we arrived in camp.

We were by this time getting well down into Kentucky, and every day we
marched through villages and towns, which, but a few short weeks before,
had been filled with sounds of life and business activity; but now
everything was at a stand still; the store houses deserted, and their
doors swinging idly on their hinges, revealing to the passer by naught
but a collection of empty shelves and bare counters. The houses, even,
were, for the most part, deserted of their occupants. War with its black
and devastating influence, was abroad in the land. It was on a Sunday
afternoon that we reached Bardstown, a place of considerable size, and
as it seemed to us, a place where considerable business had been carried
on, but now all was changed. We had been marching very slowly that day,
halting every few moments and then advancing. Just as we entered
Bardstown the bugle sounded the "Halt," and our line was directly in
front of a large brick house, the doors of which were wide open, and
coming and going through them were many officers, from the general down
to lieutenant. We were tired and travel worn, so we proposed to our
partner that we would go and see if some good water could be had.
Leaving our place in the ranks we started for the house, and boldly
marched in. Our aim was for the kitchen, and as we passed down the hall
of the house we could not prevent ourself from looking through the doors
of the parlors, as we judged them to be, for they were wide open, and
there we saw the remains of what had been a grand feast. We dared not
enter, but passed on down the hall, until a slight obstruction in the
shape of a little second lieutenant came across our path, and the demand
from him of what we were doing there. We replied we wanted water, but
did not stop to listen to any remark he might have to make. Just as we
reached the back door, a colored waiter boy, belonging to the house,
came tearing in, bearing in his hands a pitcher of water going to the
parlor. We collared this son of Ham, and demanded that he procure for us
a canteen of whisky, with the promise that if he did we would pay him
for it. His eyes rolled up in astonishment, and perhaps a little fear,
for we were rather vigorous in our demand, and with a "Lor! bress you
massa, dar hain't a drap of whisky in de house," he essayed to leave us,
but we had a good hold on him, and were going to keep it. We knew he was
lying to us, for we had caught a whiff of his breath, which gave him
away entirely, as it was redolent of the fumes of "bourbon." He saw we
were in earnest, and quickly whispering "come dis way sah," he opened a
door in the hall and bid us enter, and wait until he returned. We
entered what was, to all appearances, a bed-room, neatly fitted up with
furniture, and in one corner a bed of huge dimensions, covered with the
whitest and daintiest of counterpanes. It was the first bed we had seen
for weeks, and regardless of our dusty clothes, and remembering only
that we were tired, and in the enemies' land, we flung ourself, knapsack
and all, upon its broad and ample surface. There we laid, resting our
weary limbs and looking up at the ceiling, wondering how much longer it
would be before our sable friend would appear. The moments kept slipping
by, and at last, with a tremendous effort, we raised ourself from the
bed intending to return to the regiment. We approached the door and
essayed to open it, it was—locked. For a moment we were non-plussed; had
we come this far from home to be captured by a "nigger" in this way?
What a fool we had been to enter there, but directly other thoughts came
into our minds, and we again threw ourself upon the bed with the
intention that, if we were captured, we would get all the rest we could
out of that bed before we were marched off by rebel guards. But
imprisonment was not to be our fate at that time, for suddenly the door
flew open, and in came our colored friend, bearing in his hand a large
pitcher, which proved to contain, to the very top of it, as good whisky
as we had ever drank. To empty the contents of the pitcher into our
canteen, was but the work of a moment, and giving our friend a
green-back dollar, at which he looked with surprise and earnestly
enquired "Is dis good money, massa?" We assured him that it was, and
hastened out to find the regiment. Luckily it had not moved from where
we had left it, and we fell into place alongside of our partner, to
whose thirsty lips my canteen was soon applied. The bugle sounded
"forward," and we went, but as a truthful chronicler we are bound to
state that under the exhilarating and inspiriting contents of my
canteen, my partner soon became hilarious, and when we reached camp I
was doing double duty, inasmuch as I was carrying his gun and my own
also. It was not the length but the breadth of the road that troubled
him. But no evil consequences resulted from it, and as it was winked at
by the officers, no harm was done, and the next morning found him all
right, and ready for the incidents of the day.




                             CHAPTER VIII.


The days passed by, and we, with the blissful ignorance of new soldiers,
could not see the omens which filled the air, indicating that the battle
was not far off; omens which the old soldier can so easily interpret,
and which, as we became used to army life, were also easily interpreted
by us. But the time was near when we should meet the foe, and as we
plodded along one afternoon, tired and almost smothered with the dust,
two staff officers came riding back from the direction of the front, and
as they passed the writer caught the words, "throwing up breastworks on
Chaplin Hills." Still at the time they made no impression on my mind,
but before that time the next day, I recalled them and then understood
what was meant. The dust was terrible, and about the middle of the
afternoon a division of cavalry came riding by pressing on to the front.
They rode in column of two's, and it seemed to us that they never would
get by. The dust raised by their horses was fearful, and we were not in
the best of humor, so as they rode along we very foolishly got angry at
them, and curses flew at their heads in a pitiless storm. Some of the
boys actually pricked the horses with their bayonets. But at length they
passed us, and glad enough we were to get rid of them. We soon went into
camp in an old corn-field, and between two corn rows the writer laid his
tired body and was soon in the land of dreams. We never knew exactly
what time it was when we felt a shake and heard a summons to wake up.
The moon was shining brightly and quiet reigned all around us. But there
was something in the wind more than common, as we could judge by the
subdued voices in which commands were given, and when we were ordered to
pile our knapsacks and leave a guard sufficient to protect them, it
became apparent that there was business on hand which needed our
attention. But we well remember what our first impressions were, when
the order to pile knapsacks was given. We thought in our innocence that
the commanding powers had taken pity on us, and were going to haul our
knapsacks for us in the wagons, that they had concluded to save us the
fatigue of carrying them ourselves; so laboring under this impression we
silently fell into line and marched away in the moonlight back to the
pike from which we had moved the night before. We well remember as we
silently marched along that our file leader, a comrade by the name of
Ross, had swinging to him the half of an old knapsack filled with honey.
We intimated to him that we were particularly fond of honey, and if he
had no objection we would like to help him eat what he had, but Ross was
not in a honied humor that morning and our request was denied. I never
knew what he did with it, but am strongly inclined to the belief that
comrade Ross found other matters too weighty to attend to that morning
besides eating honey, and that he cast it from him. We were now on the
pike, when the order to "halt!" was given. There was an old barn on the
side of the pike, and behind it the head of the regiment had stopped.
"Front Face," "Right Dress," "Load and Cap," were the orders in quick
succession, and then the colonel riding down the line informed us that
the hour for battle had arrived, and he hoped every man in the 125th
would do his duty. We had come out to fight, that was what we were there
for, that was our business, but we will confess for ourself our heart
beat a trifle faster, and our gun had a colder touch than common, or at
least it seemed so. But history was to be made that day, and as it was
proven latter in the day, the 125th were willing to make their part of
it. And now the day commenced to break, and presently "bang," "bang,"
went the guns, not by volley, but ever and anon, a desultory shot from
the direction of our skirmish line, showing that our skirmishers had run
against some obstacle which bore the resemblance of a man. The daylight
grows brighter, and the guns crack oftener; occasionally a volley is
heard, and our brigade commander, Col. Dan McCook, comes tearing down
the pike on his war horse, and orders our colonel to march the regiment
to the top of a hill to our left; away we went, and arriving there found
our battery "I" of the 2nd Ills. artillery in position. We were to
support it from any and all attacks of the rebels. There we stood in
line as if on dress parade, but directly bullets came whizzing over us,
with now and then a shell. Dodging was the order of the day, and heads
were ducking in all directions; still we stood, until Col. McCook came
riding up, and calling to our colonel told him to order us to lie down.
We quickly responded to the command, but not before some of our number
had been hit. And now our battery, tired of being set up as a mark,
began to return the compliments of our rebel friends, and the air was
filled with the sharp reports of the guns and the explosion of shells,
while as a sort of an accompaniment to the noise the ping of the bullet
was heard all around us. The battle had indeed opened. We lay in this
position nearly all the forenoon, when at last there came an order for
the right wing of the regiment to move across the pike into some woods.
This we did, and took position in the rear of the 73rd Ills. to relieve
them when their ammunition should give out, and which to judge by the
way they were shooting would not be long. So there we lay expecting
every moment to go into action, but as the time passed away and the 73rd
slackened its firing somewhat, we became used to our position, and the
crash of lead and iron ceased to inspire us with the blood curdling
sensation which we had experienced at the commencement of the battle. A
few only of our boys got hit as we lay there, but the tops of the trees
suffered considerably by the solid shot, shells, and grape and canister
that the rebel-guns hurled at us, and we were quite willing they should
be the victims instead of us.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Battle is always a serious affair, and there never was, nor ever will be
a battle fought without its bringing sorrow and grief to many homes, but
it also has its ludicrous aspects, and I will relate one that happened
here. As we have said before, the 73rd Ills. was directly in front of
us, and when the firing was at its height, forth from its ranks came a
man in the wildest manner, headlong over us fellows who were laying on
the ground, shouting at the top of his voice: "Where's the doctor?
Where's the doctor? I'm shot in the head! I'm killed! I'm killed!" and
away he went as fast as he could go. We looked after him in surprise,
thinking he was the liveliest corpse we had ever seen. That night after
the battle was over, we again saw this man, recognizing him by the
peculiar color of his hat.

"Hello!" we exclaimed, going up to him, "we thought you was dead."

"No, sir," was the emphatic reply, "but they gave me a close call," and
taking off his hat he showed us where a rifle ball had raised a welt
clear across the top of his head, from front to rear. The result was
that it partially crazed him for the moment, and he was not responsible
for his actions. But here at Perrysville on the eight of October, 1862,
was where the regiment received its "baptism of fire," and here it was
that on that October afternoon it received its first order to "charge
bayonets," and to the glory and honor of the regiment be it said, not a
man refused to obey the command. Perhaps the reader may say: "I can not
see much glory in that, they were ordered to do so, and they were there
to obey orders." True enough, we reply, but when we take into
consideration the shortness of the time since the regiment had left home
without drill or discipline, and how it was forced right into the field,
we do think, and say, that the record of that bayonet charge, bloodless
though it was, was a glorious one. No odds if we did not meet any enemy
in our front, we did not know but we would, and so the absence of the
enemy does not in the least detract from the honor of the regiment. We
did not charge very far before we were ordered to "halt and lie down."
The rebels were in full retreat. Why it was that we were not allowed to
follow up our victory and capture or destroy the enemy, was and always
has been a mystery to us. The turnpike in our rear was filled with
troops, who were laying there with their guns stacked, and never during
the day did they move from that position. Not only infantry, but cavalry
and artillery; yet we stood and saw the foe quietly march away, leaving
in our hands the field of battle, and their wounded and dead to care
for.




                              CHAPTER IX.


The battle of Perrysville was always a mystery to us, and never,
although we have searched for its solution in many histories of the war,
have we been able to find an answer to our question, why it was that
Buell allowed Bragg to get away when he had in his hands the power to
crush him there and then. But with this we have nothing to do at this
time, we are trying to write the record of one, only, of the regiments
that helped to form the army there engaged that day. Suffice it to say
the battle ended at night fall. We had nothing to eat since the night
before, for the reason that our supply train could not come to us, and
after the fight was over, and the over-strung nerves began to relax,
hunger took possession of us, and all set about the hunt for food. The
writer came across some boys who were carrying an immense piece of beef
which they had obtained somewhere or other, and with true soldierly
kindness they donated him a very considerable portion of it. Returning
to the command we divided with our partner, and fastening our share to a
sharpened stick thrust it into a fire which was burning near by. We were
hungry, and although we had no salt or seasoning of any kind for our
beef, we ate it with a relish. Our scant supper being finished, we
sauntered off to glean from those we might meet, an account of the
battle as they had seen it. The serious part of it was over, for that
time, and now the more comical side came up. To hear each one relate his
feelings during the time we lay there under that rain of lead and iron,
to hear the jokes that passed from one to the other, and to hear how the
woods echoed with the shouts and laughter of our boys, feeling in their
own minds that they had done their duty, was very diverting. But amid
all this general rejoicing at the discomfiture of our enemy, there was
still a voice of pity for the wounded, and of sorrow for the many brave
lads who had that day laid their young lives upon their country's altar.
Tired at last of wandering around, we spread our blankets at the foot of
a tree, and with the light of the full moon shining on us we lay down to
rest. Our mind was filled with many thoughts, but before we knew it we
were fast asleep. How long we slept we did not know, but we were
suddenly awakened by a noise, and on rising up could see by the light of
the moon that our supply train had come up, and that Sergeant Cole, who
had command of it, was unloading the wagons on the ground. Giving our
partner a punch, we told him it was time for breakfast, so up we got and
made for the nearest pile of hardtack. We filled our haversacks, and
taking a goodly number in our hands, beat a retreat to our blankets.
Lying on the ground we munched our biscuits, and felt thankful that we
were still alive. No other disturbance troubled us that night, and we
awoke at reveille in the morning, refreshed, and ready for the duties of
the day. Fires were made, and the air was soon filled with the aroma of
coffee, and the smell of breakfast which we were engaged in cooking. Our
cooking utensils were not many or of very stylish pattern, but they
answered the purpose, after a fashion, and that was all we cared for.
When in camp regular details were made, and every company would have its
appointed cooks, whose duty it was to have the meals ready for the men
at regular hours. These cooks were relieved from all other duty, and
consequently had nothing to do but attend to this particular, and very
necessary branch of the business. In the field it was quite different,
and there every fellow had to look out for himself.

But here comes an orderly with dispatches. What's up? Going to
headquarters we ascertain that it is a requisition on our regiment for a
burial party, to bury the dead who had fallen the day before. Luckily,
as we thought, we were not called on, so finishing our breakfast we
started, in company with several of our comrades, to walk over the
battle field. There have been, of course, larger battles fought,
involving more loss of blood than was shed at Perrysville that day, but
for all that, it had been a stubborn fight, and the ground was covered
with the bodies of the slain. The blue and the gray promiscuously, lay
around us. Here had been a party of the enemy engaged during the lull in
the storm of battle in a friendly game of cards; a shell had exploded in
their midst, and left them laying there dead with the cards still in
their hands. Here lay a man with the top of his head shot off; yonder
was one whose death must have been instantaneous, for his features were
not distorted as if with pain, and he looked as if he was quietly
sleeping. But we must not stop too long in our description. Death had
reaped a mighty harvest there, and had put out forever the light, the
life, the hope, of many a hearthstone. Passing along we arrived at a
large stone house which had been converted by the rebels into a
hospital, and when the army retreated of course it and its contents,
fell into our possession. We entered the small gate, and made our way up
to the front door and walked in. There, stretched upon the bare floor,
in rows, lay the rebel wounded, and among the number several whose lives
had just gone out. Men were here who were suffering from all manner of
wounds; and groans and shrieks rent the air. One poor wretch, who sat
with his back against the wall, had had his tongue shot off by a rifle
ball, and was slowly dying of strangulation. The sight was too much for
us, and sick at heart we hastily left the house. The yard was also
filled with wounded men, but the character of their wounds was much
slighter than those in the house. The rebel surgeons were passing around
among them, and seemed to be doing all in their power for the helpless
men about them. There seemed to be no ill will or malice shown by any
one, but still our boys, of whom quite a number had assembled there,
although perfectly willing to help, and aid those who could not help
themselves, did not like to see too many airs put on, nor too much "big
me, and little you," displayed by those who were not injured. One fellow
was strutting around with an overcoat on which he had procured in some
way, how I do not know, from one of our boys, when Captain Levin Vinson,
of Co. "I," with some of his men came up; they, like our squad, were
looking over the field, and had just arrived at this house of which we
have been writing. The sight of this rebel, marching around with one of
our overcoats on, was too much for private Joe Dysart, of the captain's
squad. Stepping up to the fellow he ordered him to take off that coat;
the rebel objected; down came Dysart's gun. "Are you going to take off
that coat, Johnny?" he enquired. The rebel saw that Joe meant business,
and without more ado yielded up the garment. Joe was in earnest, and
would have made it an expensive coat for the rebel, if he had acted in
any way that seemed to Joe outrageous.

Remember, reader, this was our first battle, and horrible though a
battle field is at all times after the struggle, still in after days we
did not think so much of any little irregularity that might be apparent
in the matter of uniform. But private Dysart could not at this time look
with any feelings but those of wrath at the impudence of a rebel wearing
a coat of the same color as his own, and he was right.

Still we remained in camp, two days passed, but finally at the close of
the second day, we received orders to march. As is always the custom
after heavy cannonading, rain commenced to fall, and the night set in
dark and stormy. Why it was that our departure from the battle field of
Perrysville was delayed for two days, and then the march to commence in
the night, is more than we can explain, but probably it was not thought
by our commanding general, that Bragg would be able to move his army,
and transportation trains away in safety, if we had started sooner. The
march was not a hurried one, so we leisurely jogged along until Crab
Orchard was reached.

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER X.


That was the last we saw of Bragg's army for many a day. He had left
Kentucky with what was left of his 60,000 followers who were with him
when he entered the state, in disgust perhaps at the non-military manner
in which our army was manœuvred, or perhaps in order to more easily
obtain supplies; at any rate he was "gone from our gaze like a beautiful
dream," and we went into camp at Crab Orchard. At this place the
character of the country suddenly changes. It becomes rough and barren,
affording scarcely enough corn for its spare population; and the road
passes through defiles where a small force can resist, with great
effect, a large one, where in fact the use of a large force is
impracticable. The little forage there was in the country had been
consumed by the enemy in his retreat, rendering it impossible to subsist
any considerable number of animals. Here it was the measles broke out in
the regiment, and we were in the worst possible condition for such a
guest, a simple thing to manage when the surroundings are favorable, but
a dreadful distemper in the condition we were at that time. The weather
was chilly and cool, and the wind would blow all day long. It was a sad
sight to see the boys who were afflicted with the disease, stretched out
on the bare ground, with nothing over them but a blanket. We were
thankful it did not rain, if it had the mortality would have been far
greater than it was, many died however, and there were very few who were
able for duty. We remember assembling for dress parade one evening, but
as our number was so small, the colonel ordered us back to our quarters.
We had had no tents issued to us yet, and the most of us had thrown away
our overcoats, being unable to carry them. But now we felt the need of
them, as the nights were cold, and none of us had more than one blanket
apiece. There was grumbling and swearing, but at last some fellow solved
the problem and restored us all to good humor. No one ever knew how
"camp rumors" ever started, but start they would, and the better they
suited our frame of mind, the faster they flew. So one morning the word
went round "that the war was over, and we were all going to be
discharged and sent home right away, this was the reason why new
overcoats were not issued to us." This was the report and was swallowed
as gospel truth. When we were ordered to pile our knapsacks, the morning
of the battle of Perrysville, of course we complied with it, and when
they were brought up to us again there was much of their contents
missing; blankets were gone, had disappeared in some way, and all that
many of us received was our empty knapsacks, they were not in so great
demand, as they could not be utilized for any other purpose than that
for which they had been intended, so every fellow got his knapsack but
minus its contents, the writer got his, but the blanket which it had
contained was gone, and we thought we would have much preferred keeping
it than to have lost a dozen knapsacks. However we did not waste many
tears over it but took the first opportunity to make the loss good by
putting some other fellow to a like inconvenience. One morning while at
Crab Orchard as we were passing around the company quarters trying to
cheer up those who were sick, by sympathy and encouragement, we were
hailed by a comrade to come and help him dust and fold his blankets. We
went, of course, and when stooping over to gather up the corner of his
blanket, lo and behold there was our private mark, which we had made by
slitting the corner in three pieces. "Hello, Mac," we said, raising up,
"where did you get this blanket?"

"Why, drew it from the quartermaster of course. Where did you suppose I
got it?"—this with the blandest and most child-like air.

"Drew it from the quartermaster," we replied. "Yes I know how you drew
it, you drew it from my knapsack at Perrysville, you rascal, that's how
you drew it."

"What in thunder are you talking about," said Mack, "here help me shake
it, and don't go to insinuating that I stole your old blanket."

But we knew the property was ours, and intended to hold on to it, not
that we particularly needed it, for we had obtained another one, but we
did not propose to be robbed, as we thought we were being, in that way.
This was our blanket, there was the mark, and we were going to have it.
Mack was getting riled a little.

"Are you going to help me shake that blanket?" he asked.

We replied "no," that we were going to keep that blanket ourself. We
were in earnest and he saw it.

"I'd like to know what makes you think that its yours?" he said, in the
most innocent manner.

We held up the corner to him. "Do you see that; that's our mark."

Mac's countenance fell, he had never noticed that before, and never
another word did he say. He stooped over to pick up another one, for he
was, or had been until I came to him by his invitation, the fortunate
possessor of two. We were not mad nor out of humor the least bit, for as
the saying is: "we had been there ourself," but we requested Mac to tell
us where he got it. Seeing that we had doubled up the blanket and held
it under our arm, and was not the least bit inclined to give it up, he
said:

"Well, now, if you won't tell anybody, I'll tell you how I got it. I was
coming along the other night past Doc. McElroy's quarters, and I was on
the lookout for a blanket. I came right by where the doctor's darkey had
made down his bed for him, so I just reached down, and gathered onto
that blanket and scooted; hold on, I'll tell you the rest of it," he
said, as he recovered from the fit of laughter into which the
recollection of his theft had thrown him. "I made down my bed pretty
close to the doctor's, to see what he would say to the darkey when he
came. I did not have to wait long; here came the doctor. 'Boy, got my
bed made yet?' 'Oh yes, doctor, all right sah, made you good bed
to-night, doctor,' the darkey replied, and soon the doctor proceeded to
test the assurance. There was the bed, sure enough, but when the doctor
got down on his knees, and went to turn, as he supposed, the top blanket
down, nothing was revealed to his astonished gaze but the bare ground.
Then, said Mac, the trouble commenced. Calling the darkey he asked him
if that was what he called a good bed, where's my other blanket? he
yelled, and the air was blue with oaths.

"Deed, doctor, I lef him dar not more'n ten minutes ago, shuah, but he
done gone now, das a fac," and the darkey gave a groan. "I spec's some
of de sogers mus have stole him, doctor." And then Mac said he heard
more oaths, and a noise as if some one was in distress, and then a
sudden cracking of the bushes as of some one running, and he heard the
doctor yell out: "Leave here, you lazy rascal, you'd loose your head if
it was not fast to you," and gathering his only blanket, he saw him
making off with it with the intention, as Mac supposed, of bunking with
some body else who was blessed with more cover than himself.

Oh! said Mac, I thought I would die laughing. I could not hear all that
was said for I was laying on my back almost ready to burst. I never
laughed so in all my life, and as laughing is contagious, we were soon
laughing with him at the remembrance of his stealing the doctor's
blanket. But such was life in the army. Whenever we were in camp we
could obtain from the quartermaster anything we needed in the shape of
clothing or blankets, but on the march it was different, and if a fellow
lost anything he generally managed in some way to make himself whole, by
appropriating some other chap's property. But this was only done in case
of necessity, there was too much sterling integrity and manhood in the
regiment to allow of stealing maliciously and wantonly. The quiet
appropriating from some other mess of a blanket, canteen, mess-pan or
camp kettle, by a fellow who had lost his own, was thought nothing of,
provided the purloiner was not caught by the real owner. In that case
restitution was demanded, and if he could prove his case, the property
would be restored.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER XI.


Well, Bragg had left us, and we were all alone. So one fine morning the
bugle sounded the call to fall in to ranks, and we marched out of camp,
back on the road we had come. But not with the same feelings, we were
getting tired of this interminable marching, as it seemed to us for no
purpose, for the private soldier is generally in blissful ignorance of
the movements to be made on the board. Then again many of our comrades
were not with us, and we missed their faces and their forms. Sickness
had thinned our ranks, death had removed many, and the question rang
out, "When are we going to stop?" but the days passed away slowly; the
march, march, march, the scarcity of water, and the dust, and our
clothing was now beginning to show the marks of hard usage. But we
buckled to it and put on as good a face as possible. There was always
some fellow who said something whenever he opened his mouth, which would
provoke laughter at the most trying time, and the one who could get up a
laugh was the hero of the moment, until some one else would say
something that beat him, and then he would assume that honor. Once in a
while the drum and fife would start up, and that would infuse new life
into us, and we would rattle off the miles at a good pace while it
lasted; we used to wish they would play all the time, but the fifer's
lungs were not made of leather, and the drummer's arms would get tired;
so, as the music ceased, we would soon drop back into the old step
again. Many a time we thought, and exclaimed like Richard "a horse, a
horse, my kingdom for a horse." Then some fellow would yell out: "you
couldn't ride him if you had one, you don't know how," or would make the
enquiry if a good mule would not answer as well. And so we passed the
time away until one afternoon, tired and thirsty, we found ourselves
marching by the side of Green River. The road was at quite an elevation
from the water, and as we marched along and looked down upon its green,
cool looking surface, choked with dust as we were, we thought it the
most beautiful sheet of water that we had ever seen, and would only have
been too glad to have plunged into it and drank our fill. But we were
nearing Bowling Green, and shortly went into camp. Bowling Green still
contained evidences that an army had occupied it recently, for on all
sides of us we could see the earth works which had been thrown up by the
rebel army, under the command of General Sydney Johnston, before they
evacuated the place, after the fall of Fort Donelson.

On the 30th of October, Buell relinquished the command of our army, and
turned it over to Major General Rosecrans. Buell had failed to cut off
and compel the surrender of Bragg, and was sharply censured for his want
of activity in following up the enemy. We were glad to hear of his
removal, for we were not much inspired with faith in the generalship of
Buell; and the fact was, the escape of Bragg, when it was so evident to
the most ignorant soldier that he could have been destroyed, had cast a
feeling of depression over us, but now we hoped for better things. We
were now about 113 miles from Louisville. Here we received supplies,
clothing and ammunition, and one fine morning broke camp for Nashville,
Tenn. Here at Bowling Green we had issued to us, for the first time, the
regular regulation army hat. It was a decidedly high toned affair, and
about as convenient an article for a soldier in the field as the regular
out and out "stove pipe" hat would have been. They had enormous tops to
them, and a very moderate sized brim and to see a little man don one of
these head pieces, and start off with it, was ludicrous. The day after
receiving them we were ordered to march, and the journey that day was
enlivened by jokes and witty sayings about those new hats. A little
fellow would be plodding along when some fellow would yell out: "Say,
Sam, get out of that hat, I know you're there for I see your legs."
This, and many other like it, were passed around, and received with
roars of laughter. But we managed, by denting in the top, to reduce
their towering height somewhat, and consequently us short fellows were
not noticed so much afterwards. But those hats caused many a hearty
laugh. There ought to have been, according to the regulations, a brass
front piece to them, and a feather, but these we never got, and it was
so much the better, for it was all we could do, that is, some of us, to
manage them as it was. Here at Bowling Green, also, our transportation
was cut down. Heretofore we had been allowed one wagon and team to a
company, now only one wagon and team was allowed to a regiment, besides
the quartermaster's teams, and the consequence was that company officers
found themselves in a quandary. There had been many of our number left
behind us, and their arms and accoutrements they had turned over to
their company officers, who were responsible to the government for them.
The officers had thrown them into the company wagons, and had brought
them along in that way. Now, however, what were they to do with them?
There was a mighty flying around to the colonel's headquarters for
instructions, and he ordered them to have the arms taken to the
quartermaster, and for him to see to it that they were carried forward.
They did so, only too glad to be rid of them, and quartermaster Ayres
found himself in possession of a most abundant supply of warlike
implements for as peaceful a man as he was. How he managed to get them
along we do not know; but Ayres was a man equal to any emergency, and
brought them in triumph to Nashville.

We were all getting in much better spirits, the weather was cooler and
the health of the regiment had improved somewhat. Water was still scarce
though, and the roads very dusty. But we had a new general in the person
of Rosecrans, or "old Rosy," as we used to call him, and confidence in
our new leader inspired our hearts. His past record had been a good one
and at any rate we did not have any fear of his loyalty as we had had of
Buell's after the battle of Perryville.

One afternoon as we were marching along a fellow came marching by us
going to the front, who was crying and swearing in dutch at a fearful
rate. We thought at first that he was crazy, but we soon got to talking
with him and wanted to know what was the matter. He was a heavy, stout
looking man, and belonged to the Second Missouri, who were ahead of us,
but in the same division. The tears were streaming down his cheeks, and
as we inquired what was the matter, he broke out between his sobs: "Dem
tam rebels, dey kill mine brudder at Perryville, tam em! Tam em! Tam
em!" This was all we could get out of him in regard to it. But it seems
he had remained behind in spite of everything, to see that his dearly
loved brother received christian burial at least, and was just catching
up with his regiment. We felt very sorry for him, but still, although
sympathizing with him in his sorrow, we could not but smile at his
actions. He was terribly wrought up, and his tears had formed, with the
dust of the road which had settled on his face, a mixture, which, as he
wiped his eyes with his hand, had been smeared all over his countenance,
and with his loud sobs and his broken English not spoken in soft
accents, but bawled out as loud as he could bawl, and his oaths and
curses at the rebels who had killed his "brudder," he made altogether a
curious looking specimen of the "greenhorn." He was very, very mad about
it, and he would, in his present state of mind, have been willing to
fight the whole southern confederacy, if opportunity had offered, single
handed. He passed on and left us. What became of him I do not know,
whether on some other bloody field his spirit went to join the loved
brother, who had gone before, or whether he lived to get home in safety,
I never could ascertain. But such was army life, we would laugh and joke
at the most trivial, and very often at the most solemn things. We would
remember a good joke on any body for days, but a solemn, serious matter
would soon pass out of our minds.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER XII.


At last, on the eight of November, 1862, we reached Edgefield, on the
Cumberland River directly opposite Nashville, a distance of one hundred
and eighty three miles from Louisville, and went into camp. On the
afternoon of our arrival, after camp had been established, the writer
went over to a house near by, where there was, what had been the summer
before, a vegetable garden. There were several of us in there, digging
around with sticks to get a few onions that had been left in the ground.
We were all busily engaged, when we heard a voice ring out "what in ——
are you fellows doing in there? —— —— ye, get out of there and go to
your quarters." We raised up, and saw a man of medium size approach one
of the boys who was busily engaged in digging for onions, and hit him on
the back, shouting at the same time: "Get out of here." The man had on a
long military overcoat, all buttoned up, and it was impossible to tell
who he was by his clothing. The boy whom he had struck quickly raised
up, and with a well directed blow of his fist, knocked the unknown
gentleman sprawling; he went one way, and his cap another. Gathering
himself up, he shouted: "What do you mean, you rascal; I am General
Sheridan." That was all he needed to say; his opponent was gone in a
flash, and Sheridan after him, shouting out: "Stop that man! stop that
man!" but the General's legs were not equal to the race, and the boy
succeeded in getting to the camp, where, of course, it was impossible to
find him. The rest of us slipped away as quietly and quickly as possible
to our quarters, carrying with us the results of our search. But we
laughed and laughed at the remembrance of it; who the boy was, that had
so wilfully violated one of the sternest of army laws, that of striking
his superior officer, we never found out, but we think he belonged to
the 52nd Ohio, which regiment, as we have before stated, was brigaded
with us. We would like to have been at Sheridan's headquarters, and
heard his account of the affair, but perhaps he never told it, although
knowing him as we did, we were firm in the belief that he must have done
up a terrible amount of hard swearing at such an insult to his dignity,
but he had only himself to blame for it. If we could have seen who it
was, distinctly, he never would have got close enough to have struck any
one, for we would have fled at the sight of him.

Before we reached Nashville we had received reports of how hard run the
citizens of the place were for groceries, more especially coffee, and
had heard remarkable stories of the prices paid for such articles. So we
had been saving of our rations, thinking, perhaps, that when we arrived
at Nashville, we could realize something for them. We had grown tired of
hardtack, and visions of warm bread, butter, etc., floated through our
minds. So to saving we went; but as a true chronicler, we must state
that some of the boys did not show that true honesty which ought to
pervade all business transactions, but had been boiling their coffee
without grinding it, and afterwards drying it, and storing it away in
their haversacks, blankets, or any way they could, so when we finally
reached Nashville, there was a considerable quantity of this article in
the regiment. The next day after our arrival, the writer and his
partner, obtained a pass to go to the city. Tying up our coffee, which,
by the way, made a considerable package, we started on our trip. We
arrived in the city without any trouble, and as we were walking up a
street, was accosted by a woman who wished to know if we had any coffee
for sale. We instantly showed our stock, and informed her that she could
have it at the rate of one dollar per pound. This seemed in our eyes an
outrageous price, but she closed with our terms, and after weighing it
in a store near by, paid us for it in good greenbacks. We do not
remember, at this late day, how much it was we received, but we pocketed
it, all the same, and started out to find a place where we could obtain
a square meal. This was a difficult task, for most all the stores and
restaurants were closed, but at last we managed to find a little store
open, and in we went. We enquired for something to eat; the proprietor
informed us, a fact which we could plainly see for ourselves, that his
stock had run down somewhat, owing to the difficulties of obtaining a
new supply, and the best he could do for us, he said, was to offer us
some tripe, which he had in a jar. We were no way squeamish, and told
him to bring on his tripe. He had but a small supply, but when we got
through he had none. After the army fair of "hardtack and sow-belly,"
tripe seemed to us to have a royal taste. We paid him for his property
and departed to look up some new field of adventure. Sauntering along
the streets we came to a building in front of which we saw a good many
of our boys, some going away with light bread in their arms, and others
hurrying up to obtain some. We hastened our steps, and ascertained that
light bread could be bought there for five cents a loaf. We immediately
invested, and obtained as much as we could carry on our arms, piled up
like stove wood. We were now ready to return to camp, so away we went.
On the road back we met a number of our fellows coming along, and every
one wanted light bread.

"What'll you take for a loaf?" was the enquiry.

"Ten cents a loaf," was the reply. The consequence was that we did not
go far until our bread was all gone at double the price we had paid for
it. We then concluded to go back and get some for ourselves, but here
was where we missed it, for on our again apply-for bread, we were told
it was all gone, and no more could be had. We had contemplated having a
good supper out of that light bread, which was of good quality, but we
had foolishly let our desire for speculation run away with our supper.
There was nothing left for us to do but return to camp without any, so
away we went, cheering ourselves with the thought that if we had no
bread, we had some money, which, as we had never yet been paid off by
the Government, was something to be glad of.

[Illustration]




                             CHAPTER XIII.


The Saturday after our arrival at Edgefield the regiment received orders
to prepare for inspection the next day, Sunday. So at it we went,
cleaning up our guns and making their barrels shine like silver. This
was done by laying the gun barrel in a strap in a bed of ashes and
pulling the strap up and down, rolling the barrel with the foot. After a
short application of this kind, the barrel would be thoroughly cleaned,
the friction with the ashes having removed every particle of rust and
dirt. Our brass breast plates and belt plates were also scoured up, and
we endeavored by every means in our power to clean up thoroughly, and we
succeeded, as we thought, splendidly. This was our first regular
inspection, and we were anxious that the inspecting officer should make
a good report on our appearance. So we worked busily all day, and at
last felt confident that we would get a good report out of him. Sunday
morning came, bright and beautiful, and at the hour specified the bugle
sounded the assembly. We formed in line by companies and moved out to
the color line, where we took our places. "Attention, battalion," came
the order from the adjutant, "by companies, right wheel, march!" "Rear
rank, open order, march," and there we were ready for inspection. The
inspecting officer, who seemed to be very much of a dandy, with long
gauntlets of white leather on his arms, and everything about him looking
as if he had just come out of a band-box, in company with our colonel,
commenced going down the lines. The appearance of the men was good, the
condition of the arms, considering the kind they were and the long march
we had just closed, were pronounced satisfactory. But when he went
behind us, and commenced examining our cartridge boxes, Oh! that he had
only kept his prying fingers and inquisitive eyes off of them. In order
that the reader may understand the reason why, we must go back a little.
When we went into the fight at Perrysville, each man had forty rounds of
ball cartridges issued to him, with which to fill his cartridge box, and
strict orders were given not to waste or destroy them. But the battle
was fought, Bragg retreated, we went to Crab Orchard, and then turned
back for Nashville. No enemy was near us, as far as we knew, and as we
were tired of carrying the cartridges, we very quietly threw the most of
them away, and in their place had put our razor, shaving soap, tobacco,
or any other little article that we could stuff in, so that when our
cartridge boxes were opened by the inspecting officer on that bright
Sabbath morning, his astonished gaze, instead of resting on villainous
lead and powder, done up in paper, found in their place the implements
of the dressing-room and toilet table. It was too bad, we never thought
he would look in the boxes, so we had let them remain in _statu quo_. As
he passed down the lines of the companies his astonishment increased.
The colonel was heartily ashamed of us, and to tell the truth we were a
little ashamed of ourselves. But the "cat was out of the bag," or more
properly speaking, the cartridges were out of the boxes, and as a matter
of course the good report which we had desired was gone. In truth the
regiment was in a deplorable condition for ammunition.

At dress parade, that evening, our colonel reprimanded us severely for
our gross neglect of orders, and we felt as if we deserved it. A fresh
supply was issued to us the next day, and the boxes filled up.

The center of the rebel army at this time was at Murfreesboro, and the
principal part of their army was massed there, thirty-two miles from
Nashville. We had now been in camp since the eighth of November; no
movement of any importance had been made. We had broken camp, however,
at Edgefield, once during this time, and marched with our division to
Mill Creek, five miles south of Nashville, and had again gone into camp.
While here we were placed in the division commanded by General Robert
Mitchell, and on the twenty-sixth of December, when the army moved
forward to meet the enemy at Stone River, our division was ordered back
to garrison the city of Nashville. We arrived inside of the
fortifications of the city just at nightfall and went into camp
temporarily. We had now been four months from home, had had one battle
and a weary march, so we were noways displeased with the order, and we
concluded that at last we would now get some of the pleasures of a
soldier's life, if there were any. The next few days were passed in
selecting proper camps for us.

Nashville at this time was a very important post of the Union Army, and
here were stored immense quantities of supplies, food forage and
ammunition, while our direct line of communication, north, was over the
line of the Louisville and Nashville rail road, with John Morgan on hand
to sever that line whenever opportunity offered. We found the city
somewhat recovered from the panic into which it had been thrown, on the
receipt of the news of the fall of Fort Donelson at the mouth of the
Cumberland, the river on which Nashville is situated, and perhaps it
would be interesting to insert here a description, by a resident, of the
panic which the receipt of the news of the fall of Fort Donelson caused,
showing the terrible destruction of property, and the ravages of the
retreating rebel army.

  "Just as church services were about to commence, there appeared at
  the door a messenger, who instantly sent the sexton up to the pulpit
  with a notice that: 'Fort Donelson had surrendered at five o'clock
  this morning; the gun boats were coming up; Buell's army is at
  Springfield, only 25 miles north of the city, and each man must take
  care of himself.' Then followed a rush and a tumult, the like of
  which that city had never seen before. Such hurrying to and fro of
  carriages, buggies, omnibuses and baggage wagons, with great loads
  of trunks and valises, making their way to the depots of the rail
  roads leading to the southward. The Governor, Isham G. Harris, had
  fled on a mule, and the legislators followed him as rapidly as
  possible the same day. Regiments of rebel soldiers were coming in
  from Bowling Green, stealing and plundering on their line of march,
  from friend and foe. The cattle of the farmers were shot down in
  mere wantonness, and fences burned. Nashville was the chief depot
  for the provisions and army stores for the whole rebel dominion in
  the west, and had the same importance to the department there, as
  Richmond in the east. Of these stores there were millions of dollars
  in value that could not be moved in time. Word was given out for the
  inhabitants to come and help themselves, which they did with a will.
  In the armory were deposited some five to seven thousand rifles. Two
  thousand of the best were brought out by order of General Floyd, and
  burned. All these had been impressed from the people in the state,
  forcibly or otherwise, as they could be found in the owner's houses.
  Two elegant steam boats, formerly in the Nashville and New Orleans
  trade, purchased by the Jeff Davis government at a cost of $35,000
  each, and in process of being converted into gun boats, were burned.
  The rail road bridge that cost 50,000, and the wire suspension
  bridge, costing $150,000, both beautiful structures, were also
  burned. The mayor, with a committee of leading citizens, waited upon
  Floyd, and earnestly remonstrated against the destruction of the
  bridges, but without success. Another fine steamer, private
  property, was burned by the Texas Rangers. Five or six other steam
  boats that were lying in port, the owners had very prudently moved
  over to the north side of the river, and had thus escaped the torch
  of the rebels. From the morning of the 16th to the 24th of February,
  anarchy and rioting prevailed. Fierce and awful were the curses
  heaped upon Johnston, Floyd and Pillow, by the retreating soldiery.
  Some of them swore they were going home if it cost them their lives.
  Five thousand lives they said had been sacrificed by Johnston at
  Bowling Green, from exposure, bad fare and hard work, to which not
  many of them had ever been accustomed."

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER XIV.


Our regiment was finally placed in camp on top of some high hills in the
western part of the city, behind fortifications of cotton bales. It
brought to our mind what we had read about Jackson at New Orleans. On
the top of these hills, commanding an extensive view of the surrounding
country, we pitched our tents. We had issued to us the style of tent
called the "Sibley;" patterned after the wigwams of the Indians, conical
shape, with a large hole in the top to permit the escape of smoke. The
tent pole consisted of a wooden staff four or five feet long, which
rested, at its base, on an iron tripod of about three feet in height.
Between the legs of this tripod we made our fires, fuel being provided
by the quartermaster's department. At night when we had spread down our
blankets inside of the tents, which were intended to accommodate
twenty-five men each, we lay with our heads to the outside of the
circle, and our feet pointing to the fire. It was pretty close packing,
but we were good natured for the most part, and so we got along very
well, although, occasionally, some fellow would make a fuss, but it was
soon stopped by everybody else yelling at him to keep still, and
yielding to public opinion so emphatically expressed, the disturber of
the peace would smother his injuries, fancied or real, in his own
breast, and sleep would soon settle down upon our household.

While in camp on these hills, some of the friends of boys of our
company, came to visit them. Solomon Starr, John Huffman, uncle Archie
Gryder and several others. We were all glad to see them, and in fact it
made no particular difference who they had come to visit, we were all
glad to see them, for we were nearly all acquainted with them; at any
rate they had come from what we called "God's country," and they were
heartily welcomed. They said they wanted to see how "soldiering went,"
so we fed them well on what we had, not forgetting to supply them
liberally with that delicious dish which some one had named "s— of a
b—;" where in the world he ever got the name from we never could find
out, or why it should have been thus named, for it certainly bore not
the slightest resemblance to any member of the canine race. This
beautiful dish, in order that all may know how it was prepared, was made
as follows: hardtack broken up into small pieces, and then fried or
boiled in grease and water until it has swelled, and become as tough
almost as india-rubber. This is what we regaled our guests with, and
they accepted it with credulity. At night we would scatter them around
in the different tents, as it was impossible to keep them all in one
without putting us to great inconvenience. So one night there came up a
heavy storm of wind and rain, and the water flowed through the tents,
soaking our blankets and everything else. Our guests left us in the
morning, expressing themselves as being fully satisfied with their
experience. "Soldiering was not so very hard," they said, "but then, at
times, was inconvenient, and indeed they _must_ hurry home, they had not
intended to have staid nearly so long as they had, etc., etc." At this
late day, whenever you meet one of them, and ask him if he remembers the
night he passed in camp with us at Nashville, he will tell you with a
groan that, "yes he believes he does remember something about it," and
will always add: "you have reference to the night it rained so."

It was not long before Nashville seemed to rouse itself, and assume
something like its former appearance, and to look as it had before war
breathed its desolating breath upon the city. The stores were opened,
the hotels commenced filling up, and as far as war was concerned,
nothing was observable in the city to denote a state of war, or that the
city was under martial law, except the passing of army wagons, or the
tread of the provost guard. Order reigned, and protection from crime was
given to all. The theatres were opened and played to full houses
nightly; mostly officers and soldiers filled them, although generally
there was a fair sprinkling of citizens in the audience. Pieces bearing
directly upon the war, with strong union sentiments, were placed upon
the boards, and the performance would be interspersed with songs of the
most loyal character. One day there came an order for us to "strike
tents." We had no idea of where we were going, but our march was not a
long one, merely across the Cumberland to Edgefield, where we went into
the old camp just vacated by the 16th Illinois. A more beautiful camp we
had never seen. The quarters of the men were made of cane, which the
16th had procured some where in the neighborhood, and out of which they
had contrived to make a camp, at once beautiful and artistic. All of the
old boys will well remember it.




                              CHAPTER XV.


We were now fairly at work doing garrison duty, furnishing daily details
for provost guard, train guard, picket guard, and all manner of guard
duty that can be thought of. Our picket line extended in the shape of a
horseshoe around the city, both flanks of the line resting on the river.
General James D. Morgan commanded our division, and General Mitchell the
post, at Nashville. Strict discipline was maintained, and we often
thought that if the citizens of Nashville would have expressed their
honest opinion they would with one accord have agreed that never was
there better order in their city. There were some union people here, but
the most of the inhabitant were cherishing in their bosoms, and rolling
it as a sweet morsel under their tongues, the cause of the south. On the
morning of the 31st of December the battle of Stone River or
Murfreesboro opened. The cannonading could be plainly heard at
Nashville, and at night fall we were alarmed with the news that the
right wing of our army had been crushed and driven back, and that the
battle was strongly in favor of the rebels. Anxiety was visible on every
face, and everything was done that was thought necessary to insure the
safety of the city if the news proved to be true. We say every face, but
we are mistaken, some there were who could hardly repress their joy at
the intelligence that their rebel friends were in a fair way to drive
back the northern "mud-sills," but these reckoned without their host.
True it was that the third division of McCook's corps, commanded by
Sheridan, our old division, and which three times that day had repulsed
the desperate charges of the enemy, were themselves repulsed when the
enemy, with reinforcements, for the fourth time assailed them. But it
fought on until one-fourth of its number lay bleeding and dying upon the
field, and its last brigade commander had been killed, then it gave way
and all three of the divisions in the corps were hurled back together
into the immense series of cedar thickets which skirted the turnpike and
extended far off to the right. But Rosecrans was not whipped, though the
rebels had momentarily overpowered the right wing of his army, and he
vigorously set to work to retrieve the disaster. Brigades and batteries
from the divisions of Rousseau, Negly and Palmer were ordered to the
right to check the progress of the foe and rally the fugitives. The
infantry was rapidly massed in an array of imposing strength along the
turnpike, and facing the woods through which the rebels were advancing.
Still the broken divisions of McCook disputed the ground while
retreating, and deeds of heroism were performed by officers and men in
those dark thickets. Yet in spite of the desperate struggle which marked
every fresh advance of the enemy, in spite of the heroic sacrifice of
life on the part of the officers and soldiers of the union army, the
rebels still steadily advanced, and came nearer to the turnpike. Nearly
two miles and a half had the right wing yielded, and all the
reinforcements that had been hurried into the woods to sustain it, had
failed. The roar of cannon, the bursting of shells, the crash of shot
through the trees, and the continuous roll of musketry, all mingled in
one tremendous volume of sound, which rolled on, nearer and nearer, to
the turnpike, where the genius and vigor of Rosecrans had massed the
forces that were to receive the enemy, when he should emerge from the
woods in pursuit of our retreating battalions. Col. Loomis was there
with his 1st Michigan Battery, and Stokes with the guns furnished by the
Chicago Board of Trade, and Mendenhall and Guenther, with their regular
artillery. There were also the troops of General Wood, the brigades of
Rousseau under Schribner, Beatty and Shepherd. At last the long lines of
the enemy, rank upon rank, charged from the wood. A sheet of flame burst
from the union ranks, a crash rent the atmosphere, and the artillery
shook the earth. The foremost line of the rebel host was literally swept
away; and then both armies were enveloped in a vast cloud of smoke. For
ten minutes the thunder of battle burst forth from the cloud, and when
our battalions advanced, they found no rebels between the turnpike and
woods, except the disabled, the dying and the dead. The soil was red
with blood, for within a brief space of time, the slaughter had been
awful. Our troops having repulsed the rebel left, pushed into the woods
after them, and drove them back over the ground they had at first
occupied. Other desperate encounters occurred during the day, all along
the line. It was eleven o'clock when Hardee was repulsed. In the mean
time, while the battle was raging on the right, an attack was made upon
Palmer's division, but the rebels were driven back with loss. There was
now a lull in the storm of battle, and scarcely a volley of musketry or
boom of cannon was heard for three quarters of an hour. Some hoped that
these bloody scenes were ended for the day; but the rebel leaders,
disappointed by their failure to penetrate to our camp by way of the
right wing, were preparing for a bold blow at the centre. All the
reserves were attached to the centre of their army under Polk; and Bragg
in person placed himself at the head of the columns. And now was
presented an imposing spectacle. The nature of the ground in this part
of the field was such that every movement of either army could be
distinctly seen. The open fields toward Murfreesboro were smooth enough
for a holiday parade ground. A fierce cannonade up the turnpike
announced the coming onset, and from the very woods out of which the
rebel cavalry issued on Monday evening, the first line of battle now
sallied forth.

It came on in magnificent order; and stretching away diagonally across a
great sloping field, its length seemed interminable. At a sufficient
interval another line deployed into the open ground, parallel with the
first, and ere the forward battalions were engaged, a third line of
battle came forth from the same woods. It seemed that our feeble lines
in that direction must be crushed by the weight of these immense masses
of living and moving men. But the ever watchful eye of Rosecrans had
detected the rebel design, even before their first line of battle had
emerged from among the trees. The union army was like a set of chess men
in his hands, and its different brigades and divisions, were moved about
with as much facility, as are pawns and pieces in that grand old game.
The least exhausted troops of the left and centre, were hurried forward
on the double quick to combat this new effort of the enemy, and even
from the extreme left, where Van Cleve was posted, a brigade was brought
over to take part in the defense. The same formidable array of batteries
and battalions again confronted the foe, as that upon which the violence
of Hardee's corps had spent itself, and similar results followed. Almost
simultaneously a sheet of fire leaped forth from each of the opposing
lines, and for a few minutes both lines stood like walls of stone,
discharging their deadly missiles into each others bosoms. Then the
rebels attempted to charge, but a storm of lead and iron hail burst in
their faces, and all around them, sweeping them down by hundreds. If
once the soldiers of the union wavered before this fiery onset, it was
only for a moment, and in forty minutes from the time the first rebel
line marched forth, all three of them had been dashed to pieces, and the
survivors of the conflict flying in wild confusion over the slope, were
disappearing in the depths of the woods. The battle for the day was
over. But who can describe the sufferings which followed. The night air
was pinching cold, and in the midst of those gloomy forests of pine and
cedars on the right, numbers of men lay freezing, bleeding, dying; whom
no human hand would ever succor. The rebel pickets advanced at night to
the edge of the woods skirting the open ground, which was the scene of
Hardee's terrible repulse. The hostile lines of battle were probably a
thousand yards apart. The intervening space was covered with wounded who
could not be carried off. He who chose to risk it, could crawl carefully
up to the edge of the woods, and hear the shrieks and groans of the
wounded men who were laying by hundreds among the trees. The men in our
advance line lay down as well as they could upon the ground over which
the storm of battle had swept. It was difficult to distinguish the
bodies of the sleepers from the corpses, living and dead were slumbering
peacefully together. There were places that night, indeed, where sleep
came not to steep the senses in gentle forgetfulness. The poor soldier,
whom the bullets of the enemy had not yet reached, could gather a few
leaves, or sticks, or corn stalks, for a bed, clasp his faithful rifle
in his arms, and with his blanket around him, if he were so fortunate as
to possess one, sleep soundly, notwithstanding the bitter cold. He could
build no fires, for that would reveal our position to the enemy; but so
fatigued was he, that he could still slumber although his frame shivered
involuntarily in the windy night atmosphere. But the mangled hero,
laying in the field or hospital, knew no repose. Pain drove sleep away,
and to those who felt themselves maimed, crippled for life, the keen
mental anguish must have been more intolerable than physical pain. And
there were the faithful surgeons, too, who knew no rest from their
dreadful labors, and toiled on through the long and weary night. And so
the days passed until Sunday came, and the soldiers awoke on Sunday
morning to find the ground covered with snow, and on that day General
Rosecrans entered Murfreesboro; Bragg having retreated with all his
force. The total loss incurred by the union army was 11,285, killed,
wounded and missing; of this number 2,800 were missing. The rebel loss
was estimated at over 14,000 killed and wounded. And so ended the battle
of Murfreesboro, one of the bloodiest battles of the war. It had been
gained at a terrible cost of life and blood, but such are the wages that
war demands. We have given this description of the battle of
Murfreesboro for the purpose merely of giving the reader to understand
that the reports which reached our ears at Nashville, were not idle
rumors, but that the situation had been a trying one for our army, and
one that called for vigilance on the part of those who had the city of
Nashville in their charge. Every preparation had been made there to
receive the enemy, if, unfortunately, he should overcome our forces, but
as the result proved they were not needed.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER XVI.


While at Nashville many incidents happened in camp and we will relate
one of them here. Our sutler, Charley Pratt, had found a very neat
sutler's store, built of plank, and fitted up in a very substantial
manner, probably by the sutler of the 16th Ill., and he was not slow to
appropriate the building to his own use. In this he opened out his goods
for our inspection and benefit, and we were pretty good customers.
Charley had bought some fresh fish of which he sold a good many to the
officers. These fish lay on a shelf in the rear end of his shebang, but
in such a way as to present an inviting appearance to all. On the day to
which we refer, Charley had received a fresh supply, and among the
number was one uncommonly nice large fellow. Directly over this fish was
a large knot-hole looking to the rear of the store. Now there had been
the usual crowd all the morning around the sutler's store, and in the
crowd was Jake E——. Jake was a good soldier, but had very crude notions
of the rights of "mine and thine." Such thoughts never bothered Jake
when anything particularly tempted his vision, especially if it was
anything good to eat. Charley was aware of this fact, and when during
the morning he happened to glance over towards his fish rack, behold the
big fish was gone. He reflected a moment; he had not sold it, he knew;
his eye rested on the knot-hole; a closer inspection showed scales
adhering to the edge of the plank; he put this and that together and
finally it beamed upon his mind that his big fish, his pride and joy,
had been appropriated by some one who had not left him an equivalent.
Jake had disappeared too. A happy thought struck Charley, and off he
posted to our captain. The result of the interview was apparent when
Cap. was seen to come out of his quarters and going into the tent of the
first man who was nearest to him, commenced a search, as if looking for
lost property. This he kept up until Jake's tent was reached; in went
the captain. Jacob was reclining on his bunk in innocent ease, and when
the captain entered, he greeted him with a cordial good morning. The
captain returned the salutation and went on with his search.

"Get up Jacob," he said, as he approached the recumbent warrior.

"Why, cap., what are you hunting for?"

"I'm looking for a big fish that Pratt says was stolen from him this
morning."

"A fish," says Jake, "well now, cap., there's no fish here, I've been
laying here all the morning, as I didn't feel very well, and if any one
had brought a fish in here I would surely have seen it."

"Well, well, get up," says the captain, "I have examined all the other
boys' quarters and I must examine your's too, get up, Jacob."

Unwillingly Jake arose. The captain gathered up a blanket which he had
under his head for a pillow. Holding it up and giving it a gentle shake,
out dropped the lost fish, or a twin brother to it. Jake had nothing to
say, the captain looked amazed, quietly picked up the fish and carried
him off in triumph to the sutler. At roll call that evening the captain
stated the facts of the case as far as he knew them to the company.

"And now, boys," said he, "I want you to convene a court martial,
organize it in accordance with army regulations, bring before it Pratt
as the plaintiff, and Jacob as the defendant. If upon evidence you find
that Jacob has been guilty of stealing the fish, sentence him to such
punishment as you think the case demands; we don't want any stealing
here; if on the contrary you find the evidence faulty, why then of
course you will acquit him."

The captain's suggestions were carried out the next morning. A regular
court martial was convened, and Pratt and the prisoner brought before
it. The testimony was taken _pro_ and _con_, and the result was that the
theft of the fish was laid without any doubt on Jacob's shoulders, and
the sentence of the court was that Jacob should be thrown in the river.
As might be expected, Jake remonstrated strongly against such severe
treatment, as he could not swim. But it was no use, the sentence had
been pronounced and must be carried out, so he soon found himself being
hurried vigorously toward the river. Arriving there he was gathered up
by two stout fellows, and in he was sent head over heels. He sank and
came to the surface again. The Cumberland is a very swift stream, and
Jacob was soon going with the current, when some fellow stuck out a long
pole to him and pulled him ashore. He climbed up the bank very wet, as
might be supposed, and awful mad, and amid the laughter of all present,
for the scene had drawn a large crowd to the river side, he started for
camp, swearing vengeance on the members of that court martial. Rushing
to his quarters, he grabbed his gun with the expressed intention of
blowing the whole outfit to kingdom come, but his gun was soon taken
away from him. Jake was awful mad, and all he wanted was an opportunity
to retaliate, and it came in due order. Not many days after we received
orders to prepare for inspection, and when we went to our beds that
night we laid down with an inward feeling that we would pass a good
inspection on the morrow. Our guns and accoutrements were in splendid
condition, and each fellow had blacked his shoes until they fairly
glistened. These we placed carefully in front of our tents, for there
was a nice cane arbor there which kept off the dew, and turned in for
the night. It so happened that Dave W——, of our company, had been, as
Jake thought, rather prominent in his trial and punishment, and to
Dave's tent he made his way. Everything was quiet, all were asleep in
the tent. There stood Dave's boots as bright as leather could be made.
It did not take Jake long to accomplish his errand, and when David went
to pull on his boots to attend roll call at daylight the next morning,
he found them filled with a very unpleasant composition. There was a
row; Dave got late to roll call and came near being placed on extra duty
for it, but nothing more was said about it that ever we heard of, and it
was not until long afterwards that it leaked out who had put Dave's
boots to a use for which they never were intended. Regular details as we
have before stated, were made every day for provost duty in the city,
and each company furnished the detail as its turn came around. It was
not very severe work, but on the contrary was often mixed up with a good
deal of fun. One morning the provost detail from Co. "B" reported at
regimental headquarters for duty, and were sent under command of
corporal James Duncan over to the city to relieve the guard then on duty
there. The guard's headquarters in town were in the building used for
the custom house. The front part of the building was used by the guard,
and a room in the rear by a captain who had charge of the custom house
business. This captain was a very pompous, dignified, little creature,
and if we mistake not, was an officer of the regular army. At any rate
he acted as if this world was not quite good enough for him, and as if a
private soldier was a being so much beneath his dignity, that the only
place suitable for him was in the field; there he would serve to keep
the naughty enemy away and our little captain's precious body would not
be endangered. Well, corporal Duncan marched his squad over to town,
arrived in due time at the custom house, and reported to the
non-commissioned officer in charge that he would relieve him. The change
was soon made, and away went the relieved guard to their regimental
quarters, leaving corporal Duncan and his squad in possession. For a few
moments the corporal was busy attending to his duties and getting his
men ready for the duty to be performed by them, when suddenly, "Corporal
of the guard," came the summons, in a very imperious tone, from the room
occupied by the captain just mentioned. Dropping everything, the
corporal started to see what was wanted. The door of the room was open,
and he marched into the august presence of the little captain, who
looking up cast on him for a moment a disdainful glance.

"Go back, sir, and come in again," was the command. Jim obeyed, and
again made his appearance.

"Go back again, sir," shouted the captain. Again he made his exit,
wondering to himself what in the world that fellow meant. Again he
returned, and again the same command for him to "go back." Jim was
getting mad; he did not like to be made a fool of by this little
pop-in-jay in shoulder straps, and the sequel might have proved
unpleasant if it had gone on much longer. But at last the little
captain, very red in the face, shouted at him:

"Go back and come in again, sir, and when you come in, salute me in a
proper manner."

Poor Jim obeyed this time and the irate little captain was satisfied, as
Jim, with not a very good grace, raised his hand to his cap in regular
military salute. Pop-in-jay then gave him some orders, and Jim came back
to us shutting the room door in a manner more forcible than pleasant to
the nerves of the conceited fop inside. Was Jim mad do you ask? well
slightly we remark. Did you ever see a hornet's nest stirred up? how mad
each individual hornet will get! well, Jim was as mad as a whole nest of
hornets, and he vowed the deepest vengeance on that captain. But that
was all that ever came of it. Corporal Duncan was one of our best men,
and was liked by all, and was always ready for duty; but ever after this
affair, if any one wanted to be particularly aggravating and
tantalizing, they would ask Jim "if he didn't think he could give 'em a
salute, this fine morning." Poor fellow, he contracted the small-pox
while at Nashville, and came very near dying; but he recovered at last,
badly disfigured, and with the loss of an eye. He was discharged and
sent home.

[Illustration]




                             CHAPTER XVII.


While at Nashville the pay master came, and gave us six months pay. This
was very welcome, for the regiment was about cleaned out of money. We
were, all of us, more or less in debt to one another, and some of the
debts were contracted for very singular purposes. Card playing was a
great pastime with many; poker being the game most in vogue. But poker
playing without money, was considered rather dry fun. So some ingenious
chap hit upon the plan of each fellow giving his note for his losses,
payable at pay day. There was a good many of these notes in camp, and
now that pay day had come, the holders of them were clamorous for their
money. We do not know how they ever settled it, as we were not given to
card playing ourself, and consequently had no interest in the matter,
but we heard considerable fuss made, and several fights occurred over
the trouble, which generally was wound up by the participators being
ordered to stand on a barrel, or carry a rail for a certain length of
time. But now that we had money once more, things began to look a little
different in the dress of the men. Paper collars made their appearance,
fine boots, hats purchased in the stores of Nashville, and clothing of
the regulation style and color, but of finer material, were sported
every day on the persons of the warriors. Many sent their money home by
express, others opened up "chuck-a-luck" banks, and in some cases won a
good deal of money, while some lost all they had. At Nashville, too, we
received, officially, the President's Emancipation Proclamation. It
caused a great stir. There were many who were opposed to it (we have
reference to the army of course), and several officers resigned their
positions and went home. The army was better off without them. The
proclamation was a matter of earnest and grave debate with us all, and
strong and stubborn arguments were urged on both sides. It will be as
well to remark here that when the regiment was organized its political
complection was of a decided democratic tinge. We had faith in Douglas'
doctrine, and many of us thought it a cruel and outrageous piece of
business to deprive the South of its slavery in this way. But how
different the subject looks to us now. Douglas sleeps in his quiet tomb
on the shores of Lake Michigan, while the remains of the mighty Lincoln,
the promulgator of the immortal proclamation, the wise and good ruler,
"with malice toward none, and with charity for all," quietly rests in
the mausoleum at Springfield, the capitol of the state he loved so well.
President Lincoln followed the logical course of events in issuing this
proclamation. He was neither too soon nor too late with it. He had a
host of interests to consult, all of which involved the social,
commercial and political happiness of the country. He found the
institution of slavery sustaining a great agricultural interest in many
states of the Union. Cotton, sugar, rice and tobacco, and other staples,
seemed to live upon its labor, and vast European and American
enterprises depended on its preservation. The villages of Lancashire,
the counting rooms of New York, the mills of Massachusetts, the looms of
France; to the uttermost ends of the earth, in India and Australia, the
safety of the cotton crop, and the protection of cotton labor, were
matters of comfort, necessity and bread. It was not an easy matter to
proclaim a decree, so universal in its application, and so radical in
its operation, and to the wisdom and sagacity of our martyred President
let us record it, that he did not issue the proclamation until justified
by the treason and violence of the promoters of the cotton interest, and
masters of cotton labor.

But our stay at Nashville was drawing to a close. We had been here so
long that it seemed to many of us when marching orders at length came,
like leaving home. We had formed acquaintance with a good many of the
citizens, and had established very social terms with them, and, in fact,
were enjoying ourselves very pleasantly. But the life of a soldier is
always uncertain, and his abiding place transitory, here to day and gone
to morrow. We had been in Nashville at this time about six months, and
it was now June. Shortly after our arrival here, the "weeding out" of
the regiment, as it might be called, took place. Many officers, finding
themselves unfit, physically, for the arduous labors of the field,
resigned. The men whom sickness and disease had rendered unfit for
further service, were discharged and sent home, and the effective force
of the regiment was thoroughly cleared of all incumbrances, and brought
up to the highest military standard. The time had not been wasted, but
every day drilling, and manœuvering had been practiced. The regiment had
been relieved of its worthless Austrian rifles, and given the Enfield, a
splendid weapon. We all had good clothing, and good health. The first
rough edge of our soldier life, had been taken off, and we were now
inured to anything reasonable in the shape of hardship and exposure.

So at last one bright June morning in 1863, the orders came for us to
"strike tents." We had also received, while here at Nashville, our
shelter, or as the boys called them, our "dog tents," and as it may be
interesting to some who read these pages, we will describe what the "dog
tent" was like. It consisted of two pieces of canvas about four feet in
length and three in width. One end of these pieces had button holes
worked in it, and the other buttons. Two men occupied each tent, and of
course each fellow selected his own tent mate, or "partner," as we used
to call him. Each man carried, when on the march, one-half of the tent,
in other words each man carried the half of his house roof, and it was a
very particular matter that no disturbance should arise between these
"dog tent" dwellers, for if there did one fellow would walk off with his
half of the house, leaving the other one to make the best of the
situation. But happily for us good feeling prevailed throughout the
entire regiment amongst the men. Of course there were a few who were
naturally inclined to be peevish and irritable, but they soon got over
it when they found the majority were opposed to such exhibitions of ill
nature. These "dog tents" were about three feet high, and in consequence
whenever we wanted to get into them, we had to come down on our knees
and crawl in, hence their name. They answered very well for us short
fellows, but the long legged chaps found it difficult to keep their feet
inside of the house. When we arrived in camp at night it was a simple
matter to pitch them; every other man, nearly, was supplied with a neat
little hand-ax, and all the labor required in erecting our tents was to
cut two forked sticks, sharpen the ends and drive them into the ground,
a long straight stick for the ridge pole, the ends of the tent buttoned
together and thrown over it and staked down to the ground, and the house
was ready for occupation. They answered the purpose very well for life
in the field, and were tolerably comfortable.




                             CHAPTER XVIII.


We firmly believe that the mule and dog tent, were two great levers in
aiding to put down the rebellion, for it would have been impossible to
have transported, in wagons, tentage enough for that great army. But Oh!
how mad we got when they were first issued to us. We swore "we wouldn't
have anything to do with 'em, they were pretty looking things to give a
man to sleep under," and our anger at the Government was great. But time
makes all things even, and we found that the genius that had invented
the "dog-tent," was worthy all praise. Their erection and taking down
was but the work of a few moments, and when each piece was tightly
rolled up it formed a very small parcel, and handy to carry. So away we
marched from Nashville, as finely an equipped army division as ever took
the field. We were indeed a small world within ourselves, and each man
carried with him his own board and lodging. We were on the march for
Murfreesboro, and camped for the night at Lavergne, a small place
fifteen miles south east of Nashville. Next morning we were again on the
move for Murfreesboro, which place we reached that day, and went into
camp. All around the place were visible signs of the terrible struggle
which had taken place. Here were the rebel breast works and
fortifications, erected by the negroes, under the eye of skillful
engineers who had been educated at the expense of that government
against which they were now directing their best efforts. Here were the
ruts which had been cut by army wagons and artillery, showing the
terrible condition in which the ground must have been. The skeletons of
horses and mules were all around us; here lay a broken and dismantled
gun carriage, yonder a wrecked ambulance, and look which way you would,
desolation and ruin met the eye. Here, also, were the winter quarters
which the rebel army had provided for themselves, thinking that we would
go into winter quarters at Nashville, and perhaps that they might
themselves be able to occupy that place. But they were doomed to
disappointment, and neither place gave them rest for the soles of their
feet. We only remained at Murfreesboro a few days when we were again
ordered to move.

Chattanooga was now the objective point of the General Commanding, and
thither we bent our steps as rapidly as possible. To reach that point
from the position we now occupied, required a march of from sixty-five
to seventy miles, over a country destitute of forage, poorly supplied
with water, and narrow and difficult wagon roads. Before again
commencing active operations however. General Rosecrans determined to
repair the Nashville and Chattanooga rail road, to bring forward the
needful subsistence and forage for the army, which it would be
impossible to transport on wagons. At Stevenson, Alabama, these supplies
having accumulated in sufficient quantities by the eighth of August,
corps commanders were that day directed to supply their troops as soon
as possible with rations and forage for a general movement. We began the
march across the Cumberland Mountains on the morning of the 16th of
August, 1863, and completed the movement by the evening of the 20th. We
made a good part of the march after night, over the roughest roads
imaginable; now winding along the side of the Tennessee River, which we
could see far down below us, with the stars reflected in its bosom; now
down a jump off of at least two feet, tumbling and stumbling over rocks
and boulders, we wended our weary way. It was a hard march, and we were
thankful when it was over. But the object of our General was
accomplished, and the rebels were flanked out of Chattanooga, which had
been very properly called the Gibraltar of the West. It was indeed a
strongly fortified place naturally. It lays on the south bank of the
Tennessee River, and was almost impregnable from the front. But the
flank movement of Rosecrans was too much for the rebels, and on the
eighth of September, they evacuated the place, and our army took
peaceable possession. We were now under command of Major General Gordon
Granger. Marching through Chattanooga, which did not look as if it had
ever been much of a town, we moved out to a little place called
Rossville and went into camp. Here it was that an incident occurred
which for a time threatened to create a great disturbance. General
Granger had issued strict orders, forbidding foraging by the men, but in
spite of all orders to the contrary they would slip out into the
adjacent country and procure what they could in the shape of eatables.
On this afternoon to which we have reference, General Granger was
sitting in the yard in front of his headquarters, when from up the road
which passed in front of him, came a couple of boys loaded down with
fresh meat.

"Halt there," said Granger. "What have you got there?"

"Meat," said the boys.

"March in here," came the command, and into the yard with their meat
they went.

"Did you not know that my orders forbade foraging? Throw your meat down
there, and take one of those rails, each one of you, and march around
that tree," pointing to a tree that stood near by. They silently obeyed.
Granger resumed his position, from which he had arisen, cursing and
swearing. He had not been seated long, however, before another squad
came marching by laden down with eatables.

"Halt!" again rang out. "March in here you men, and throw your stuff on
that meat; pick up a rail apiece, and march around that tree."

As before the order was obeyed. Granger was furious, and striding off to
his adjutant's tent, ordered him to send out some mounted men, and bring
to his headquarters, all men found foraging. The order was given, and
soon the horsemen were seen riding on their errand. They returned after
a while with quite a squad of unfortunates who were loaded down with all
conceivable manner of food. Marching them into the presence of Granger,
they were ordered to do as the others had done, and such another pile of
eatables that yard had never before seen. Chickens, ducks, geese,
turkeys, flour, hams, honey, grapes, potatoes, the carcases of calves,
sheep and hogs, everything almost that could be thought of. On to the
pile they were thrown, and each fellow, shouldering a rail, commenced
his march around a tree. Granger was wild with rage; he stamped and
swore "His orders had been willfully disobeyed, and, by G—d, he was
going to make an example of these fellows." Calling for the sergeant of
his headquarters guard, which, on that evening, happened to be from our
regiment, and which, if we are not mistaken, was under command of
sergeant Poage, of Co. "E.," he ordered him to go to the teamsters and
get a "black-snake." But all this had not happened without the knowledge
of the rest of the command, and soon quite a crowd had collected around
to see the boys as they marched up under arrest, but as soon as they
heard the order for the sergeant to go for the "black-snake," they
hurried off to their quarters. Granger never knew how near he was
death's door that evening, for the boys were about to mutiny, and the
first lash that had been given, would have been the signal for the
trouble to begin. The whole affair had been arranged almost in the
twinkling of an eye, and as soon as the first blow had been struck, the
signal would have been sounded, which would have swept Granger and his
headquarters from the face of the earth. But the cooler reasoning of
General Stedman and Colonel McCook at last prevailed with the maddened
general, and in place of the whipping, the boys, with backs bared, were
tied by the thumbs to wagon wheels, a prey to the voracious mosquito.
What was ever done with that huge pile of provisions in the yard, we do
not know, but are inclined to the opinion that the doughty Granger
feasted on a goodly share of them. From that day on our dislike for
Granger was intense; he had proved himself a tyrant, and a man of
ungovernable passion, and we fairly hated him.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER XIX.


On the evening of the 18th of September rapid cannonading was heard off
to our left in the direction of Chickamauga Creek. Dispatches were soon
received that Col. Minty, with his cavalry, had encountered the enemy at
Reed's bridge across the Chickamauga, and was being heavily pushed.
Orders were immediately issued for our brigade to move out to his
support. It was almost sun down when we started, and when night overtook
us the firing had ceased. It was getting dark when the head of our
column ran into the rear end of a rebel wagon train moving on a road
crossing ours. We were in the midst of a cedar thicket along either side
of the road so close and dense that a horse could not have been turned
around in it. The meeting of this wagon train was as much a surprise to
us as it probably was to them, for we had no skirmishers out and were
marching along in every day style. We were in a bad shape, certainly,
but we will not stop now to argue about the matter. As quietly and
quickly as possible the brigade was formed in line of battle at right
angles with the road, and skirmishers thrown out, but no enemy was found
excepting the members of a brass band, who had been following along
behind the rebel wagon train. These, with their instruments on their
backs, were quickly taken in "out of the wet." The skirmishers were
recalled, a strong picket guard posted and the regiment proceeded to
pass the night. No fires were allowed, and as quietly as possible we
laid down on our arms. We had eaten nothing since noon, but we had
marched rapidly and were tired, and worn, and soon were asleep. At the
earliest peep of day we were awakened, not by the bugle, however, but by
our officers going around and rousing up the men. Orders were given at
daybreak to make small fires and boil our coffee. This we did gladly,
and soon each man had a tin full of good warm coffee, which was highly
relished. But we were not given much time to tarry, for soon the order
came to "fall in." The entire brigade in line of battle, but without any
skirmishers, moved forward down through the brush, which was more open
than formerly. We had not proceeded far when up came the brigade
quartermaster, C. H. Deane, of Peoria, as fast as his horse could
travel. "Halt!" rang out. The quartermaster riding up to Col. McCook,
handed him an order; reading it hastily, he immediately gave the
command: "About face!" "File right, march." Back we went at a good pace.
We of course did not know at the time the reason for this rapid
movement, but we found out afterwards that we had been marching into the
nicest kind of a trap, which the rebels had laid for us, and if the
quartermaster had been delayed but a short time, the fate of the 3rd
brigade, 2nd division, 14th army corps would have been sealed. We were
surrounded on three sides and the rebels were doing their level best to
close up the other end when we marched out just a little too soon for
them.

And now we come to the battle of Chickamauga, the second field
engagement which had taken place under the leadership of General
Rosecrans since he assumed command of the army of the Cumberland, and as
it may prove interesting, we will endeavor to give a more extended
sketch of it than would be necessary if we only chronicle the movements
of our own regiment. The morning of Saturday the 19th of September
dawned on the first day of the battle of Chickamauga. The early forenoon
passed away without forewarning of the approaching conflict, but shortly
before 11 o'clock the storm that had been brewing all the morning on the
rebel side, burst forth. At that time a long mass of rebel infantry was
seen advancing upon General Brannan's division on the extreme left. It
first came upon the second brigade, Col. Croxton commanding, and soon
forced it back, despite its determined resistance. The two other
brigades of the division at once came to its assistance and succeeded in
checking the progress of the rebels and driving them back. But their
column being, in turn, strongly reinforced, they advanced again with
wild yells. So powerful was the momentum of the assault that it pushed
Brannan back to and beyond his position in the line, thus uncovering the
left of Baird's division, which at once became fiercely engaged. The
storm rolling from left to right, fell next upon Johnson, and almost
simultaneously on Reynold's, who wavering at times, but again regaining
their firmness, gave back a little but again advanced, until the troops
of Brannan and Baird, rallied by their leaders, came up once more to the
work. Then the order was issued for the entire line to advance, and
nothing in military history exceeds in grandeur the charge of that
powerful corps. Longstreet's men, from Virginia were directly opposed to
the troops of Thomas, and although they fought with stubborn
determination, they could not for a moment check the steady march of
those veteran battalions. They had already pushed the enemy before them
for three-quarters of a mile, recovering all the lost ground and all of
the material of war lost in the morning, and Longstreet was threatened
with annihilation, when a new danger caused him to halt. While our left
was driving Longstreet's corps, Polk and Hill threw themselves
impetuously upon Palmer and Van Cleve, of Crittenden's Corps, who
failing to advance, left a gap between himself and Thomas. These
divisions were speedily broken in pieces and their complete rout was
imminent, when Davis's division came to their support, and for a time
restored the fortunes of the day. But the enemy, knowing that all
depended upon his making a diversion in favor of the defeated
Longstreet, massed nearly the whole of his available force, hurled it
upon Van Cleve and Davis, drove the former to the right and the latter
to the left, and entered boldly the opening thus made. In this junction,
General Rosecrans called up the division of Wood and Negley, and threw
them into the gap. After a brief contest the rebels found themselves
matched. An advance was ordered, and by sunset the original position of
the morning was gained. During the night of Saturday to Sunday, General
Rosecrans made some changes in the disposition of his forces, and the
line was so far withdrawn, that it rested along a cross road running
north-east and south-west and connecting the Rossville with the
Lafayette road. By this change the line was contracted by a mile, and
the right wing caused to rest on a strong position at Mission Ridge. The
different divisions were disposed in this order. From right to left, one
brigade of Negley, Johnson, Baird, Palmer, Reynolds; two brigades of
Negley, Wood, Sheridan and Davis, with the mounted brigades of Wilder
and Minty covering the right flank. As before, Thomas held the left,
Chittenden the centre, and McCook the right. Upon the right of General
Thomas' line, as held by Reynolds and Brannan, was a slight rise in the
plain, and from the top of this, the field could be commanded. It was
the key to the position. During the night Thomas' troops had built a
rude breast work of logs and rails for their protection. The battle of
Sunday opened at 10 o'clock in the morning. The enemy repeating the
tactics of the previous day by throwing themselves first upon the
extreme left of the line formed by General Beatty's brigade, of Negley's
division, and for two hours a fierce fire swept along the line of Thomas
without his budging an inch. Again and again the rebels advancing _en
echilon_ by brigade from the cover of the woods into the open
corn-field, charged with impetuous fury and terrific yells towards the
breast works of logs and rails. But each time the fiery blasts from our
batteries and battalions swept over and around them and their ranks were
crumbled and swept away. In answer to a message from General Thomas,
asking for reinforcements, which led General Rosecrans to believe that
General Brannan was out of line and that General Reynold's right was
exposed, orders were dispatched to General Wood to close upon Reynold's,
and word was sent to General Thomas that he should be supported, even if
it took away the whole corps of Crittenden and McCook. General Davis was
ordered to close on General Wood, and General McCook was advised of the
state of affairs, and ordered to close his whole command to the left
with all dispatch. General Wood, overlooking the directions to "close
up" on General Reynolds, supposed he was to support him by withdrawing
from the line, and passing to the rear of General Brannan, who it
appears was not out of line, but was in _echilon_, and slightly in rear
of Reynolds' right. By this unfortunate mistake a gap was opened in the
line of battle, of which the enemy took instant advantage, and striking
Davis in flank and rear, as well as in front, threw his whole division
into confusion. The same attack shattered the right brigade of Wood
before it had cleared the space. The right of Brannan was thrown back,
and two of his battalions, then in movement to a new position, were
taken in flank and thrown back through the brigades of Van Cleve, then
on the march to the left, throwing his division into confusion, from
which it never recovered until it reached Rossville. The rout of the
right and center was now complete, and after that fatal break, the line
of battle was not again reformed during the day. The army was in fact
cut in two. McCook, with Davis, Sheridan and Wilder being thrown off to
the right; Crittenden, except one brigade of Wood's, being broken in
pieces, and Thomas, with his indomitable corps, and Johnson's division
of McCook's, remaining alone upon the left. But Thomas' corps also had
been fearfully shaken, and retreat was now the only resort. Retiring his
command accordingly, he took up a new position along the base of
Missionary Ridge, the line being so formed that the left rested upon the
Lafayette road, and the right at the Gap, representing the arc of a
circle, and a south-east hill about its center formed the key to the
position. Here were collected the shattered remnants of the powerful
corps (not a fourth of the army) which had so long breasted the fierce
assaults of the enemy in the forenoon. It was certain, however, that
unless assistance should speedily reach it from some quarter, it must at
length succumb, for the enemy emboldened by the rout of McCook and
Crittenden, was gathering his hosts to hurl against them in a last
mighty effort. At this crisis Mitchell's and McCook's brigades of the
reserve corps, under command of General Granger, arrived. The fight now
raged around the hill with redoubled fury. General Thomas formed his
troops in two lines, and as each marched up to the crest and fired a
deadly volley at the advancing foe, it fell back a little way; the men
lay down upon the ground to load, and the second line advanced to take
their place, and so on in succession. Every attack of the rebels was
repulsed, and the enemy at night fell back and abandoned the assault.
And thus did twelve or fourteen thousand heroic men save from
destruction the army of the Cumberland. At night General Thomas fell
back to Rossville, four miles from Chattanooga. Our loss in killed,
wounded and missing reached twelve thousand; and fifty pieces of
artillery and much material of war fell into the hands of the enemy. The
enemy's loss also was extremely heavy. Saturday's fight resulted in a
drawn battle; Sunday's in a defeat, which was only saved from utter
disaster by the coolness and courage of General Thomas and his gallant
command. That night our brigade marched back to Rossville and on Monday
night we marched inside of the fortifications of Chattanooga, and so
ended the battle of Chickamauga.




                              CHAPTER XX.


On the 19th of October, 1863, General Rosecrans, in General Orders, No.
242, turned over the command of the Army of the Cumberland, to Major
General George H. Thomas, by order of the President. He had commanded us
for nearly one year. The last words in his farewell address to the army,
were: "Companions in arms, officers and soldiers, farewell, and may God
bless you." We all liked "Old Rosy," as we used to call him, and very
sorry to part with him, but we also knew the grand qualities of General
Thomas as a commander, and we received him with open arms. And here also
we received General Order, No. 1, notifying us that Major General W. T.
Sherman assumed command of the Military Division of the Mississippi,
embracing the Departments of the Ohio, of the Cumberland and of the
Tennessee. Chattanooga was made as near impregnable as it was possible
to make it. Three strong lines of defence were constructed and all the
fords of the Tennessee river were closely guarded. But we were destined
to have a hard time of it. The army would have to be thoroughly
reorganized, and refitted. The brigade to which we belonged was ordered
up to Caldwell's Ford on the Tennessee River, opposite the mouth of
North Chickamauga Creek. There we remained until the battle of
Missionary Ridge. Still the army was in a critical situation. The rebels
had taken position on Look Out Mountain and Missionary Ridge in front of
us, and were doing what they could to bombard Chattanooga, but the
shells generally fell short; and on our extended and exposed line of
communication, their cavalry were making frequent raids, and near a
place called Anderson, in the Sequatchie Valley, they destroyed between
two and three hundred wagons, about thirty of which were loaded with
ammunition, and the remainder with clothing and supplies; the mules,
which they could not run off, were shot, to the number of several
hundred.

Our regiment was now detached, as it were, from the rest of the brigade,
and the principal duty imposed upon us was guarding Caldwell's Ford. But
as all the supplies for the army had to be hauled over one line of rail
road to Bridgeport, and from there carried by pack mules to Chattanooga,
and as the rebel cavalry were constantly interrupting this line of
communication, supplies of all kinds soon began to fall very short. The
boys got irritable and peevish, they could stand a good deal of
hardship, but now their rations were cut short, and they often felt
hungry. There was still a little corn for the horses and mules of the
regiment, but it had to be guarded with an eagle eye or it would
disappear very suddenly. The boys were hungry, and were constantly
appropriating the forage of the animals whenever they could find it.
This matter at last became monotonous, especially to the field officers
of the regiment, who saw their horses day by day assuming architectural
proportions, and they ordered their colored servants to guard the feed
more closely. Colonel Harmon gave his boy orders to carry the feed for
his horse into his, the colonel's, tent, and put it under his bunk.
"They can't get it there," said the colonel with a chuckle, "without my
knowing it, you may depend, I would just like to see them try it," and
he rubbed his hands with glee, thinking that at last he had solved the
problem, and that the feed of his charger would be secure. In accordance
with his orders the darkey carried the corn into the colonel's tent, and
carefully piled it up under his bunk. The next morning when he went to
get the breakfast for the horse, what was his surprise to find that the
last vestige of corn was gone. Hurrying to the colonel, with the whites
of his eyes glistening, and his face drawn out of all shape with wonder,
he quickly stated the case: "Why, kurnel, dar aint a grain of dat ar
corn lef fur de hoss, de las grain done stole by by some one, sah—shah!"
For a moment the colonel was puzzled, and hardly knew what to say; but
the corn was gone for a fact, and it was useless to try and find it, so
turning away he carelessly remarked: "I thought I heard something
fumbling around under my bunk last night when I went to bed, but
supposed it was a mouse." This circumstance afforded us much amusement.
It seems that some fellow who had overhead the orders given by the
colonel to his servant, had gone to the colonel's tent that night, and
slyly lifting one corner of it, had thrust in his hand and quietly
stolen, right from under his bed, the colonel lying on it at the time,
the last "nubbin." There was no use trying to hide anything, it would
surely be found by some one. But the boys thought a good deal of the
colonel, and in all probability had stolen the corn just to show him
that nothing was sure in war, for from this on they did not bother him,
and the colonel's horse got all of his allowance.

The headquarters of the brigade was a short distance above our camp, and
nearly every day Colonel McCook, or some of his staff, would go riding
past, bound for Chattanooga. They would not get by the regiment,
however, without their ears being saluted with such shouts as "hard
tack," "sow belly," "give us our rations," etc., etc.; this annoyed
Colonel McCook greatly, for the comfort of his men was always uppermost
in his thoughts, and he was not at all to blame for the scarcity of
rations. We knew this, but out of a pure spirit of deviltry would salute
him every time he went by, with phrases like these. One afternoon he
came riding up from Chattanooga, returning to his headquarters, and as
he passed he was saluted with a most vigorous chorus of "hard tack,"
"sow belly," etc. Stopping his horse, aggravated sorely, as he properly
was, and perhaps at that very time thinking of the condition of his men,
he shouted back: "You may be glad to eat rubber blankets, yet." That
seemed for a moment to quiet them, but directly some fellow shouted
back: "If we do, you'll have to furnish 'em." This was too much, and the
colonel proceeded on his way; this last remark of the boys settled him.
That Colonel McCook arrived safely at his headquarters, we were soon
made aware, by the receipt of an order forbidding any more such
salutations, under penalty of severe punishment.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER XXI.


Matters and things moved on smoothly, the old routine of guard duty,
dress parade and all the regular business of camp life, including half
rations, being faithfully kept. We now come to a matter which happened
while we were at the Ford, which for a short time made things very
lively and animated in the camp of the 125th. The Tennessee is a wide
stream, and anything going on on the opposite side, can not be seen very
distinctly with the naked eye. But to many of us, on the afternoon of
the day to which we have reference, could be seen objects moving on the
hill side across the river. These objects proved to be rebels, that side
of the river was in their possession then, but what they were doing we
could not ascertain, and so at last we ceased to pay any attention to
them. The day passed as others had done, and when night came we retired
to our beds to dream of home and loved ones. The night passed quietly,
but just as the first streak of gray appeared in the east on the morning
of Nov. 16th, 1863, we were awakened by the boom of cannon, and the
whistling of shells, and the crashing of shot through, around and above
us. We were not long in turning out of our tents. "What was the matter?"
"Where were they?" was asked on all sides. The long roll was beat, and
the voices of the officers giving command resounded through the camp.
The regiment was thrown into dire confusion and the majority of them
followed in the wake of the pay-master over the ridge. We soon found out
where the shots came from. The objects we had seen the day before across
the river had been rebels engaged in putting a battery in position in
order to shell our camp, and as soon as daylight came, they opened up
the entertainment. And a beautiful mark they had to shoot at, as the
regiment lay on ground sloping to the river and nothing intervened
between us and them but the broad bosom of the Tennessee. The pay-master
and his clerk were with us at the time, and in his wake had come Charley
Pratt, our sutler, to collect from the boys sundry bills they were owing
him. These gentlemen, of course, were non-combatants, and as soon as
they could, conveniently, took to flight over the ridge in our rear,
where they took position, resolved, as they afterward said, to hold
their ground at all hazards. But as regarded their toilet they were
sadly deficient, and as they disappeared over the ridge, their shirt
tails were fluttering in the breeze, looking in the distance like flags
of truce. The whole affair lasted but a few moments, our third Wisconsin
battery opened on the rebels and at the third round drove them away,
having blown up a caisson for them as we could plainly see by the smoke.

There were many narrow escapes with us; one solid shot found a resting
place in one of the boy's bunks, and others went crashing through the
tents, but without doing any more damage than tearing them to pieces.
But we were called upon to mourn the loss of one of our number, the
chaplain. As was evident, he had arisen from his bed and was in the act
of tieing his shoe, when a solid shot came crashing through his tent,
tearing off half of his head, killing him instantly. This sad event cast
a deep gloom over the regiment. Chaplain Saunders was a good man, and
was respected by all the boys, a quiet unassuming gentleman. He had won
our respect and confidence, and we mourned his death. We sent his body
north for burial, feeling that we had lost a good man. And such is the
fate of war. Sitting here at home in peace and security, with my little
baby girl playing by my side, and watching me as I write, asking me
questions and striving in her childish way to attract my attention, my
mind wanders back to the banks of the Tennessee. And as memory brings up
the recollection of those times, and the events which followed, of the
brave boys whom we used to meet, and with them hold daily converse, now
sleeping in their southern graves beneath the soughing of the pines, the
tears came to our eyes and we throw down the pen, we can write no more
to-day.

We were not much longer to enjoy this _otium cum dignitate_, however.
The iron was in the furnace, and would soon be ready for the stroke of
the general's hammer. The enemy at this time, as we have before said,
were posted on the heights of Missionary Ridge and Lookout Mountain.
Their cavalry was swarming in our rear and on our flanks, and our army
represented a giant, resting from his labors, but to rise at last and
with the stroke of a thunderbolt scatter his enemies like chaff. And now
we come to the battle of Missionary Ridge. On the night of the 23rd of
November, Sherman, with three divisions of his army, which had arrived
at Chattanooga on the 15th of November, from Vicksburg, Miss.,
strengthened by Davis' division of Palmer's corps, of which division we
now formed a part, and which had been stationed along the north bank of
the Tennessee, convenient to where the crossing was to be effected, was
ready for operations. At an hour sufficiently early to secure the south
bank of the river, just below the mouth of South Chickamauga Creek, by
dawn of day, the pontoons in the North Chickamauga, which our brigade
had been guarding, were loaded with thirty armed men each, who floated
quietly past the enemy's pickets, landed and captured all but one of the
guard, twenty in number, before the enemy was aware of the presence of a
foe. The steamboat "Dunbar," with a barge in tow, after having finished
ferrying across the river the horses procured from Sherman, with which
to move Thomas' artillery, was sent up from Chattanooga to aid in
crossing artillery and troops, and by day light of the morning of the
24th of November, eight thousand men were on the south side of the
Tennessee and fortified in rifle trenches. This movement, so admirably
executed, put the whole of Sherman's army in position for the great
battle that was now to begin.

[Illustration]




                             CHAPTER XXII.


We will not undertake to follow every movement of the army made to
capture the heights of Missionary ridge, as it would be, perhaps,
uninteresting to the reader, and out of place here, but will pass on to
the morning of the 25th. So far every thing had gone well with the union
army. Every movement had been successful. Suddenly from a point
overlooking the field of battle, known as Orchard Knob, and on which
army headquarters had been established, rang out the signal ordering an
advance of our entire front. The line moved rapidly and orderly. The
rebel pickets discharged their muskets, and ran into their rifle pits,
much resembling the ground squirrel, when alarmed he seeks his den. Our
skirmishers followed closely on their heels. The line of battle was not
far behind, and the gray rebels were seen to swarm out of their rifle
pits in surprising numbers, and over the crest of the hill. A few turned
and fired their pieces, but the greater number collected into the many
roads which cross obliquely up its steep face, like cattle trails, and
went to the top. Our lines pressed on and up the steep sides of the
ridge, and here and there a color was advanced beyond the lines. The
attempt appeared most dangerous, but the advance was supported, and the
whole line was ordered to storm the heights, upon which not less than
forty pieces of artillery, and no one knows how many muskets, stood
ready to slaughter the assailants. With cheers answering to cheers, the
men swarmed upward. They gathered to the points least difficult of
ascent, and the line was broken. Color after color was planted on the
summit, while musket and cannon vomited their thunder upon them. A well
directed shot from Orchard Knob, exploded a rebel caisson on the summit,
and the gun was seen galloping to the right, its driver lashing his
horses. A party of our soldiers intercepted them, and the gun was
captured with cheers. A fierce musketry fire broke out to the left,
where between Thomas and Davis a mile or two of the ridge was still
occupied by the rebels. Bragg left the house in which he had held his
headquarters, and rode to the rear as our troops crowded the hill on
either side of him. General Sherman proceeded to the summit, and then
only did he know its height. Some of the captured artillery was put in
position. Artillerists were sent for to work the guns. Caissons were
searched for ammunition. The rebel log breastworks were torn to pieces,
and carried to the other side of the ridge and used in forming
barricades. A strong line of infantry was formed in the rear of Baird's
line, hotly engaged in a musketry contest with the rebels to the left,
and a secure lodgment was soon effected. The other assault to the right
of our centre gained the summit, and the rebels threw down their arms
and fled. Bragg's remaining troops left early in the night, and the
battle of Chattanooga, after days of manœuvering and fighting, was won.
And now commenced a movement in which our brigade took a part that
called forth our strongest efforts to endure. Major General Burnside,
with his command, was holding the city of Knoxville in the eastern part
of the state. This part of Tennessee was intensely loyal to the old
flag, and it was the intention of Burnside to hold his position, cost
what it might. Knoxville is guarded on the south by the Holston river,
and on the west side by a range of hills, so that Longstreet had tried
to reach it from the east and north. Here the place had been fortified
as well as the short time would permit, but Longstreet had Burnside
surrounded, and if relief did not shortly arrive he must surrender to
the rebels. Information reached us on the 27th of November, that General
Burnside was completely invested, and had provisions only to include the
third of December. Seven days before, we had left camp on the north side
of the Tennessee, with two days rations, without a change of clothing,
stripped for the fight, with but a single blanket or coat per man, from
the general down to the private. We had no provisions, only what we
could gather as we went along, and were ill supplied for such a march.
But intelligence that twelve thousand of our fellow soldiers were
besieged in the mountain town of Knoxville, eighty-four miles distant,
had reached us. This was enough, they must be relieved, and away we went
to their aid. It was a terrible march and we made it in six days. But
before our arrival Longstreet had raised the siege and departed, with
Burnside's troops in pursuit. General Granger moved into the city with
his troops, and we returned to our old camp on Chickamauga Creek, foot
sore and weary, our clothes torn almost into shreds, and our shoe soles
entirely gone, but we had marched for a big stake and had won. We
remained in camp resting, and receiving supplies and clothing, and on
the seventh of May, moved with the rest of the army on the road to
Atlanta. The rebel army at this time lay in and about Dalton, and were
superior to our army in cavalry, and with three corps of infantry and
artillery, the whole commanded by General Joseph E. Johnston, making a
grand total of infantry, cavalry and artillery of about 60,000 men. Now
commenced a campaign, which for fighting, stubborn resistance and
manœuvering, can not be equalled in any history. It was on the seventh
of May that we left Chattanooga, and not until the seventh of the
following September, five months in all, did we rest from our labors. We
will not attempt to relate each and every battle that was fought, for we
cannot do that; it was continual battle from the time we left our
fortifications near Chattanooga, until we arrived at Atlanta, so we will
journey on, merely mentioning places at which some event took place that
bore particularly on the conduct of the regiment.

[Illustration]




                             CHAPTER XXIII.


On the 24th day of June, General Sherman ordered that an assault should
be made at two points south of Kenesaw Mountain, on the 27th, giving
three days notice for preparation and reconnaissance. Our division
constituted the assaulting party on the centre. On the night of the
26th, a council of war was held at corps headquarters, and the final
orders for the assault on the following day were given. The orders to
regimental commanders were: for the regiments to "load and cap," but not
to discharge a gun until they had reached the rebel breast works, then,
as they went over them with a yell, to fire their pieces, and finish the
work with the bayonet. These orders were given by the colonels of the
regiments to the line officers, and through them transmitted to the
non-commissioned officers and privates. The morning of the 27th broke
clear and cloudless, and at daybreak the regiments moved to the assault,
leaving all their camp equipments behind them, with a sufficient guard
for their protection. We moved out to the summit of a hill, here the
brigade and regimental commanders dismounted, leaving their horses in
care of their orderlies. Down the slope we went until we reached a jack
oak grove at the foot, where we formed our line of battle. At the far
edge of this bunch of oaks was a wheat field, and on the other side of
this field stretched the line of rebel breast works. Our line of battle
was soon formed, and there we stood waiting for the signal to advance.
At last off to our left a cannon belched forth its thunder, and as its
echoes came rolling down the line, each man grasped his rifle with a
tighter grip. Colonel McCook at the head of the brigade waved his sword
and gave the command: "Attention battalions, charge bayonets," and with
a rush and a cheer away we go. And now the battle commences. We have
reached the wheat field, and at yon side are the rebel breast works. At
the double quick we cross the field with a storm of lead and iron in our
faces; men are falling on all sides; there goes McCook down—quickly
following him, Harmon, who was bravely urging his men on, falls pierced
through the heart. Captain Fellows, our brigade inspector, also falls to
rise no more. See! the colors have disappeared, but only for a moment
when again they wave; the color sergeant had been shot down. Lieutenant
McClean, of Co "B," is hit and falls, so, also, sergeant Cunningham, and
Captain Clark, of Co. "E." They are dropping as the leaves in the
autumn, and oh! how that fire of hell beats in our faces. It is too
much, the works cannot be carried by assault, and our line, mangled,
torn and bleeding, falls back. But only for a short distance, however,
when we again halt amid that never ceasing fire. Some of the boys engage
the foe, while others, with tin cups and bayonets, burrow and dig in the
ground to throw up protection for themselves. We are not whipped, if we
_have_ failed in our attempt, and thirty-five paces only is what we will
yield to the rebels. Still the bullets, and the shells, and the solid
shot fly, and still more brave boys are sealing with their life's blood
their devotion to their country's flag. But why prolong the tale, the
ground is soaked with blood; but with that love for the old flag which
has floated so gallantly at our head over so many bloody fields, and
under whose stars and stripes the weary and oppressed of every land have
found a shelter, under whose protecting folds we have lived in peace and
security, until driven by its enemies to war; with that love kindling in
our breasts we stand ready to die, if need be, but never to dishonor its
beauty and its grandeur.

The long day at last draws to a close, and night, welcome night, settles
down upon us. To the weary and worn soldiers, night brought no repose,
but like beavers we worked erecting breastworks to protect us on the
morrow. The battle for the day is over. The cries of the wounded, and
the desultory shot of a rifle, is all that is heard beyond the noise
made by the soldiers in erecting their breast works. But there were
deeds of heroism enacted on Kenesaw's rugged brow that day that have
never been excelled on any battle field. Private James Knox, of Co. "B,"
had his thumb shot off early in the engagement, but refusing to go to
the rear, pressed forward until a rebel ball felled him to the ground;
rising on his hands and knees, for he could not walk, he turned his face
to the enemy, and in that position crawled off the field, declaring he
would never turn his back to the foe. 2nd Lieut. James McLean, also of
Co. "B," was hit early in the fight, but pressed on in command of his
company, until a ball, passing through his body, felled him to the
ground. All night long we worked, and when the morning broke we felt
secure, and were ready to renew the combat. But between our line and the
rebels, lay our dead and some of our wounded. The lines were so close
together, that stones were thrown by the rebels, severely wounding some
of our men. Morning broke and revealed to the foe what we had done
during the night. Firing at once commenced and was kept up all day. The
stubble and leaves between the lines had taken fire, and that with the
smoke from the guns, was making our situation very unpleasant. The dead,
too were fast decaying, under the burning rays of that Georgia sun, and
the most horrid stench filled the air. It was becoming unbearable, so
Colonel Langley, who had, until the death of Harmon, been serving on the
corps staff, but was now in command of his regiment, concluded to see if
an armistice could be arranged in order to give us an opportunity to
bury the dead, but not a white handkerchief, or white rag of any
description, could be found; so raising a copy of the "Chicago Tribune,"
which he had in his pocket, he succeeded in his purpose, and an
armistice of two hours was agreed upon, and the men poured over both of
the lines of works. You would not think as you see them now, as they
shake hands, and swap coffee for tobacco, and laugh and joke together
like old friends, that a few moments before they had been seeking each
others lives. But they are gathering up the dead; here comes a stretcher
borne by two men, on it lays the body of Captain W. W. Fellows, once the
commanding officer of Co. "C," but acting for some time previously as
brigade inspector. Silently we follow after them. How we loved that man!
an entire stranger to the writer a few short months previous, he had by
the subtle magic of his nature charmed us. He was not only a brave
officer, but a polished gentleman, always willing to help the needy, and
always ready at the call of duty. Capt. Fellow's death, that bloody day
at Kenesaw, was deeply mourned by us. We felt as if we had lost a near
and dear friend; always with a kindly smile of greeting when we met,
never, like so many others, defiling his mouth and disgracing his
manhood by uttering vile oaths and blasphemies. We saw him on the
morning of the assault before we moved from camp, and stopped for a
moment to exchange greetings, little did we think for the last time. We
buried him on the hill side where the first rays of Georgia's sun should
shine upon his grave; and the wild flowers bloom above him, and the
southern songster warble a requiem for the soldier from the Northland.
Here, also, was buried Captain Marion Lee, and some others who had
fallen in the strife. _Requiescat in pace._ Leaving the burial party to
end their labors, we proceed up the road to find if possible our field
hospital, where so many of our boys lie wounded. The road is flanked on
either side by thick brush; going along we happened to look to our
right, and see a sight that makes our blood stand still, so unexpected,
and so awful is it. There, in that clump of hazel, lays the body of our
colonel, where he had been carried directly after he fell. A sickening
feeling creeps over us as we stand in the presence of the dead, whom we
had seen such a short time before in full health and vigor. Yes, there
he lay, his life ended, his heart's blood given for his country's good.
Colonel Harmon was a christian man; what more can we say? A strict
disciplinarian, he had the solicitude of a father for his regiment, and
he wanted his men to feel that in him they had a friend who would look
after their welfare. With one sad, lingering look, we tore ourself from
the spot, with our heart stirred with deep emotion. But yonder is the
hospital tent. The weather, as we have before stated, was intensely
warm, and the hospital tents, or rather "flys," were stretched in such a
manner that their sides were raised some two feet from the ground, thus
giving a thorough circulation of air. We enter; there lay our poor
fellows, and as they see us they shout out a welcome. These fellows near
the entrance, are not so badly wounded as those farther on, so,
returning their greeting with an assumed show of glee, we pass into the
tent. And now we are in the midst of desperately wounded boys who are
lying here, some of them, without a vestige of clothing on them on
account of the heat, slowly dying. We feel sorry that we have come to
the hospital, but the wish to do something in some way to help the poor
lads, is uppermost in our thoughts. Here is 2nd Lieut. James McClain,
with his negro servant (faithful fellow) sitting by him, fanning him. We
kneel down by the lieutenant. We had been old acquaintances before we
left home, consequently no undue stiffness of official ceremony could
come between us. Poor Jim, he was drawing his breath in gasps; we saw
that death had set his seal upon his brow, and with a sorrow at our
heart that we believe was the deepest we ever felt, we said:

"Jimmy, is there anything we can do for you?" Opening his eyes, at the
sound of our voice, and reaching out his hand, he exclaimed:

"Oh, Bob! I am so glad to see you."

But our emotions overcame us, and in spite of all we could do, the tears
would come. But we checked them as soon as possible and again repeated
our question. Opening his eyes with his breath coming in convulsive
gasps, he said:

"Bob—write—to—my—mother,—tell her,—that I died—doing my duty."

Oh! if we could have had at that moment a heart of stone, so that we
could have talked to him, but it was too much: however we managed to
whisper to him a hope that he might get well, but no, he knew better, he
knew that his life was fast drawing to a close, and moving his head
slowly, he replied:

"No, Bob, I am dying."

We could not stand it and gently stooping over him, we kissed him on the
forehead, and turned to the next man lying beside him, who proved to be
orderly sergeant Benjamin F. Bonebrake. Ben presented a terrible
appearance, he had been wounded in the head, and the blood had streamed
down over his face and whiskers and over his once white shirt bosom, and
dried there, giving him a ghastly appearance.

"Do you want anything, Ben?"

"Yes, I would like to have my face washed."

Oh! how quiet and gentle these poor boys were, no complaining, no harsh
words, but there they lay, bearing their pain with true heroism. "All
right," we reply, glad to be able to get outside for a moment, and away
we went to the brigade hospital steward, with whom we were acquainted,
for what we needed. We found him and on the strength of
acquaintanceship, procured from him a hospital bucket with some warm
water and a sponge, and before we left him we had coaxed him to give us
a clean shirt for Ben out of the sanitary supplies he had on hand.
Rejoicing at our success, we hastened back, and proceeded to make Ben
more comfortable; we washed his face, combed his hair and whiskers, and
helped him on with the clean shirt. With a grateful acknowledgement he
lay back in his place. Next to him was sergeant Wash. Cunningham, good
natured, free hearted Wash.; a man of large and powerful frame, he had
received a rifle ball through the left arm; poor fellow he had gotten
down in such a shape, that his wound was paining him, and in reply to
our question as to what we could do for him, he said: "Nothing, only if
you could help me to raise up a little." We looked at his massive form
and felt afraid to touch him, for fear of giving him pain; we told him
so, and he replied: "All right, Rob, I can stand it." We wanted to get
away, we were feeling sick and were afraid to stay longer, but there was
one more boy whom we must find before we went, and this was Patrick
Sullivan of Co. "G." We searched and searched and at length we found
him, lying on his back, on his rubber blanket without a stitch of
clothing on him; he was lying in a pool of his own blood, with his eyes
closed, and his face pale and bloodless; we thought at first he was
dead, but kneeling down by him, we spoke his name. The heavy eyelids
opened, and with a smile on his countenance, he reached us his hand, we
grasped it and put the question:

"Can we do any thing for you, Patsey?" For a second there was no reply,
and then his lips opened and he said:

"Oh! Rob, if I could only sleep; I want to sleep but can't, the doctor
won't pay any attention to me, and there is such a noise."

He was a little delirious, and the roar of the cannon and the musketry
was still in his ears. But unloosing his hand we started out to find the
surgeon. We ran across him and told him what we wanted, that one of the
boys had been overlooked, and needed help, would he not come to him;
this with an impassioned force. He would come, he replied, as soon as he
could, but his hands were full. "No, doctor," we pleaded, "come now,
come now," and catching hold of his coat we would not let him go. Dr.
Hooten, our brigade surgeon, was a man of tender heart, and he saw we
were terribly in earnest. "Where is the boy," he said. We quickly turned
and conducted him to Patsey's side. Bending over him he examined him; he
had been shot through the lungs. Getting up he motioned for us to
follow. "Go to the steward," he said, "and tell him to mix you some
morphine and whisky," telling me the right amount of each. I hurriedly
left him and was soon returning with the medicine. Reaching his side I
knelt down and told him to open his mouth. Inserting the tube of the
hospital tin between his teeth, I gently poured the medicine down his
throat, but it had no sooner touched his stomach than he vomited it up.
I repeated the dose and had the satisfaction at last of seeing him
retain it. Drying up the blood and wet in which he was laying with some
old rags, we left him with the assurance that he would soon be sleeping.
Having been away now from our command for a long time, we felt we must
hurry back, however much we felt disposed to stay and do what we could
for our boys, so going outside of the fly, we started back to the
command. But our mind was torn and rent with sad feelings. Yonder under
that hospital fly, lay boys whom we tenderly loved, wounded and
helpless, breathing, slowly breathing their lives away, while others
suffering pain almost unbearable, lay with teeth clenched, and knitted
brows, suffering on in silence. As we slowly walked along how we strove
for the mastery of our feelings, but we could not help it, and in spite
of all we could do, we cried like a child. Sitting down by a tree until
we had partially overcome our sorrow, we arose and again started for the
company, while ringing in our ears were the words: "Vengeance is mine I
will repay, saith the Lord." How the memory of those days come surging
back upon us as we sit at home penning these lines. The scene is as
fresh in our memory as if it had happened only yesterday, and the events
of those times comes sweeping over us like a flood. But the boys we
loved so well, our neighbor lads at home, have long ere this mouldered
into dust in their southern graves, can we doubt for a moment that their
souls are happy? that they are now singing the happy songs of angels
around the great white throne on high? No! No! doubt cannot enter, and
so we feel that they are better off than we. All glory to their
memories. And such is the tale of the assault on the rebel lines in
front of Kenesaw. How many homes it darkened by the shadow it cast upon
their firesides. The 27th day of June, 1864, will long be remembered by
many families in Champaign and Vermilion counties.




                             CHAPTER XXIV.


The assault on Kenesaw, as far as capturing the enemy's works were
concerned, was a failure; but this did not prove, by any means, that we
were whipped. So on the next day it was determined to advance the line
held by our brigade, which was formed in close column by regiments, the
125th being in the front line. The movement was made in order to mine
the works of the enemy. As the distance was not more than two hundred
feet, it was an extremely hazardous undertaking, but as yankee ingenuity
cannot be balked, Col. Langley devised a plan, the like of which was
never seen before during the war, and completely casts in the shade all
engineering exploits on record. The colonel and one man, corporal Joseph
Frankenburg, of Co. "E," who volunteered for the undertaking, crawled
from our line to a tree some twenty yards in advance, and behind it
commenced digging a small pit. After digging enough earth to give
protection, an empty cracker box was dragged up from our lines by means
of a rope, and filled with earth, this was placed in front of the pit,
and after digging a little more, another cracker box was brought along,
filled, and placed in juxtaposition. This was continued with success,
until finally the whole regiment advanced the twenty yards, and were
safely ensconced behind the cracker box fortification. Mining at once
commenced under the colonel's direction, but the evacuation of the
rebels rendered it useless to proceed with the work to its completion.
It was the intention to mine under the rebel breast works, and on the
morning of the 4th of July, to usher in the day by one of the grandest
pyrotechnic displays that had ever occurred in those parts, which would
strike terror and dismay to the hearts of the rebels, and would
undoubtedly have been, for some of their number, the last 4th of July
celebration they would ever have honored with their presence. But the
"Johnnies" found out the scheme, and evacuated the works. Prisoners
stated that they suspected something of the sort was going on, so
placing a drum on the ground, and on its head some small pieces of
gravel, the digging of our boys caused the head of the drum to vibrate,
and make the gravel move. This scheme frustrated our designs, but the
wonder of many of us was, where they learned enough of philosophy to
induce them to make the experiment. One rebel stated that he was
stationed where "the mine would have blown him to h—ll if we'uns hadn't
left."

Pending the armistice to bury the dead between the lines, the rebel army
was represented by Colonel Rice of the 28th Tennessee, our side by
Colonel Langley. Colonel Rice was very anxious that the arms and
accoutrements of our soldiers who fell at the rebel breast works, should
be given over to them, but to this Col. Langley objected, and proposed
that they should be regarded as neutral property, and not touched by
either party until one or the other should occupy the ground. To this
Colonel Rice reluctantly consented, knowing that if he did not it would
be equivalent to saying that the rebels were not going to hold their
position. The upshot of the matter was just as Colonel Langley expected,
the rebels evacuated, and we got all the arms, some 250 Enfield rifles.
The rebel generals Cheatham and Hindman, were present during the
armistice, and as everything connected with our assault on Kenesaw is of
the deepest interest, we have concluded to give a description of these
noted rebels. Cheatham's uniform consisted of an old slouch hat, a blue
hickory shirt, butternut pants, and a pair of cavalry boots. The
supports to his unmentionables were an old leather strap, and a piece of
web, the general appearance being that of a "johnney" gone to seed. In a
conversation with our colonel he stated that he was of the opinion that
the war would be settled by treaty, as neither party could conquer. He
was satisfied that we had so completely revolutionized Missouri,
Arkansas, Tennessee, Kentucky, West Virginia, Maryland and Louisiana,
that, they would never form part of the Confederacy. He virtually
admitted that he was only fighting from principle, and not for the love
of the Southern Confederacy. When Tennessee passed the ordinance of
secession, he went with it, and as he had cast his lot, he did not like
to "back down." Hindman was an Arkansian, and had the reputation of
being a confirmed gambler and black-leg. He did not command the respect
of his troops, and by his brother officers he was despised. In
appearance he was very dressy. His auburn hair flowed in ringlets over
his shoulders, and it was stated that a light mulatto girl dressed it
for him every morning. Colonel Rice was very gentlemanly and humane in
the manner in which he assisted our fellows to pay the last sad rites to
those who had fallen in front of their works while bravely fighting.




                              CHAPTER XXV.


Acknowledging the failure of the assault, but acting under the
conviction that it would be fatal to rest long under the influence of a
defeat, General Sherman determined to again try a flanking movement, and
in consequence every effort was put forth to make it a success.
Accordingly on the 1st of July, General McPherson was relieved by
Garrard's cavalry in front of Kenesaw, and the relieved command was
hastily moved to the right. General McPherson commenced his movement on
the night of July 2nd, and the effect was instantaneous. On the morning
of the 3rd Kenesaw was abandoned and the first dawn of day saw our
skirmishers appear on the mountain top.

Marietta was evacuated, and General Sherman entered it in person at
half-past eight in the morning, just as the enemy's cavalry vacated the
place. The orders were to push the enemy, with the hope of catching him
in confusion as he made the passage of the Chattahoochie river. But
Johnston had provided against this and had covered his movement well. On
the 7th of July, we had effected a crossing of the river. At the same
time General Garrard had moved rapidly on Roswell, and destroyed the
factories which had supplied the rebel armies with cloth for years. Over
one of these the nominal owner displayed the French flag, which of
course was not respected. On the 10th of July at day light, Johnston
retreated southward, leaving the army of the union undisputed masters
north and west of the Chattahoochie river, along whose grassy banks we
remained quietly in camp until the 16th of July, though the time was
employed in collecting stores at Alatoona, Marietta and Vinings Station,
strengthening the railroad guards and garrisons, and improving the
bridges and roads leading across the river. On the 17th, everything
being in readiness, we were again ordered to advance, and formed a
general line along the old Peach Tree creek road. Our brigade crossed
the creek on logs and impromptu bridges in face of a heavy fire from the
enemy, who occupied intrenched lines ready to receive us.

On the afternoon of the 20th about 4 p. m., the enemy sallied from his
works in force and fell in line of battle against our right center. The
blow was sudden, and somewhat unexpected, but after a severe battle they
were repulsed, leaving on the field about 500 dead, 1000 wounded, 7
stands of colors and many prisoners. His loss could not have fallen
short of 5000, whereas our loss was covered by 1500 killed, wounded and
missing. On the 21st a reconnoisance was made of the enemy, in his
intrenched position, at a general distance from Atlanta of about four
miles. On the morning of the 22nd this whole line was found abandoned,
much to the surprise of the union army. We thought, for a time, that the
enemy had concluded to give up Atlanta without further contest. Gen.
Johnston had been relieved of his command and Gen. Hood substituted. A
new policy seemed resolved on, of which the bold attack on the right was
the index. Our ranks without opposition swept across the strong and well
finished works of the enemy, and closed in upon Atlanta until they
occupied a line in the form of a general circle of about two miles in
radius, when the enemy was again found occupying in force a line of
finished redoubts, which had been prepared for more than a year,
covering all the roads leading into Atlanta. Here it was, that under the
leadership of their new commander, Hood, they made a desperate assault
on our lines, but only to be repulsed with terrible slaughter. But this
battle of the 22d of July cost us 3,722 killed, wounded and prisoners,
and among the dead was Major general McPherson. The enemy left on the
field an aggregate loss of 8000 men. And so the days passed, fighting
and erecting breastworks, until on the 1st day of September, when as we
were in front of Jonesboro, a small town below Atlanta, the rebels came
out of their works and offered us battle. The enemy attacked with Lee
and Hardee's corps and after a contest of over two hours withdrew behind
their works, leaving over 400 dead on the ground, and his wounded, of
which about 300 were left in Jonesboro, making his loss not much less
than 2,500. Orders were at once given for all the army to turn on
Jonesboro. About 4 p. m. of that day Gen. Davis, our corps commander,
was all ready, and we assaulted the enemy's lines across open fields,
carrying them and taking as prisoners Govan's brigade, including its
commander and staff and two four-gun batteries. The next morning the
enemy was gone. He had retreated further south. About two o'clock that
night the sounds of heavy explosions were heard in the direction of
Atlanta, distance about twenty miles, with a succession of minor
explosions and what seemed like the rapid firing of cannon and musketry.
These continued for about an hour, and again about four a. m. occurred
another series of similar discharges, apparently nearer to us, and these
sounds could be accounted for on no other grounds than that of a night
attack on Atlanta by General Slocum, or the blowing up of the enemy's
magazines. Rumors began to arrive, through prisoners captured, that
Atlanta had been abandoned, and that Hood had blown up his ammunition
trains, which accounted for the sounds. On the morning of Sept. 2nd a
courier arrived from Gen. Slocum, reporting that the enemy had evacuated
Atlanta, blown up seven trains of cars and retreated on the McDonough
road, and that he, Slocum, held possession of the city. On the 7th of
September the entire army went into camps grouped about Atlanta, our
brigade having reached the city on the night of the 3rd in charge of
nearly 1700 prisoners captured at Jonesboro, was posted in the suburbs
of the city. Thus was completed and sent down to history another of the
great campaigns of the war.

[Illustration]




                             CHAPTER XXVI.


Our victorious march from Chattanooga to Atlanta, was a military
operation, whose successful close would have turned the heads of the
French. It was made through a country presenting great natural
obstacles, sufficient to deter a general of average qualities, and these
natural defences the enemy had strengthened by a series of remarkable
works, before each of which some generals would have paused to lay
siege. But our leader, with the soldiers under his command, proved equal
to every emergency, and the campaign ended with glory to our arms.
Immediately after occupying Atlanta, Gen. Sherman posted the Army of the
Tennessee, in the neighborhood of East Point; the Army of the Ohio, at
Decatur, and retained the Army of the Cumberland to hold the city. Thus
stationed we were permitted to enjoy the rest we so greatly needed.
Although nearly all the inhabitants of Atlanta, whose circumstances
permitted them to go, had left that city previous to its occupation by
the Federal forces, yet a great many remained both by choice and
necessity. It was determined to make a grand military post of Atlanta,
and as one of the first measures to this end, General Sherman directed
that all non-combatants must leave the city at once. He knew that the
inhabitants of Atlanta could not subsist long in the city without the
aid of the Government, and his line of communications was too long and
precarious to permit him to divide the rations of his soldiers with
citizens. He therefore issued an order commencing thus: "The city of
Atlanta being exclusively for warlike purposes, will at once be vacated
by all, except the armies of the United States, and such civilian
employes as may be retained by the proper department of the Government."
This order may appear to be harsh and vindictive, yet it was not only
justifiable, but absolutely necessary. The mayor and two members of the
city council of Atlanta, petitioned General Sherman to revoke it, to
which petition he made the following reply, than which a more noble
defense of his order, could not be made. As this letter of General
Sherman's seems to us to be of more than common interest, and as it will
undoubtedly be highly interesting to the reader who scans these pages,
we will insert it here:

                     Headquarters Military Division of the Mississippi
                       In the field, Atlanta, Ga., September 12, 1864.

  James M. Cahoun, Mayor; E. E. Rawson and S. C. Wells,
      representing City Council of Atlanta, Gentlemen:

  I have your letter of the 11th, in the nature of a petition, to
  revoke my orders removing all the inhabitants from Atlanta. I have
  read it carefully and gave full credit to your statements of the
  distress that will be occasioned by it, and yet shall not revoke my
  order, simply because my orders are not designed to meet the
  humanities of the case, but to prepare for the future struggles, in
  which millions, yea hundreds of millions of good people, outside of
  Atlanta, have a deep interest. We must have _peace_, not only in
  Atlanta, but in all America. To secure this, we must stop the war
  that now desolates our once favored and happy country. To stop war,
  we must defeat the rebel armies that are arrayed against the laws
  and constitution, which all must respect and obey. To defeat these
  armies we must prepare the way to reach them in their recesses,
  provided with the arms and instruments which enable us to accomplish
  our purpose. Now I know the vindictive nature of our enemy, and that
  we may have many years of military operations from this quarter, and
  therefore deem it wise and prudent to prepare in time. The use of
  Atlanta for warlike purposes is inconsistent with its character as a
  home for families. There will be no manufactures, commerce or
  agriculture here for the maintenance of families, and, sooner or
  later, want will compel the inhabitants to go. Why not go _now_,
  when all the arrangements are completed for the transfer, instead of
  waiting until the plunging shot of contending armies will renew the
  scenes of the past month? Of course, I do not apprehend any such
  thing at this moment; but you do not suppose that this army will be
  here until the war is over. I can not discuss this subject with you
  fairly, because I cannot impart to you what I propose to do; but I
  assert that my military plans make it necessary for the inhabitants
  to go away, and I can only renew my offer of services to make the
  exodus, in any direction, as easy and comfortable as possible. You
  cannot qualify war in harsher terms than I will. War is cruelty, and
  you cannot refine it; and those who brought war on our country
  deserve all the curses and maledictions a people can pour out. I
  know I had no hand in making this war, and I know I will make more
  sacrifices to day than any of you to secure peace. But you cannot
  have, peace and a division of our country. If the United States
  submits to a division now, it will not stop, but will go on until we
  reap the fate of Mexico, which is, eternal war. The United States
  does and must assert its authority, wherever it has power, if it
  relaxes one bit to pressure, it is gone, and I know that such is not
  the national feeling. This feeling assumes various shapes, but
  always comes back to that of Union. Once admit the Union, once more
  acknowledge the authority of the National Government, and instead of
  devoting your houses, and streets and roads, to the dread usages of
  war, I and this army become at once your protectors and supporters,
  shielding you from danger, let it come from what quarter it may. I
  know that a few individuals cannot resist a torrent of error and
  passion, such as has swept the South into rebellion, but you can
  point out, so that we may know those who desire a government, and
  those who insist upon war, and its desolation. You might as well
  appeal against the thunderstorm, as against these terrible hardships
  of war. They are inevitable, and the only way the people of Atlanta
  can hope once more to live in peace and quiet at home, is to stop
  this war, which can alone be done by admitting that it began in
  error and is perpetuated in pride. We don't want your negroes, or
  your horses, or your houses, or your lands, or anything you have,
  but we do want and will have a just obedience to the laws of the
  United States. That we will have, and if it involves the destruction
  of your improvements, we cannot help it. You have heretofore read
  public sentiment in your newspapers that live by falsehood and
  excitement, and the quicker you seek for truth in other quarters,
  the better for you. I repeat then, that by the original compact of
  Government, the United States had certain rights in Georgia, which
  have never been relinquished, and never will be; that the South
  began war by seizing forts, arsenals, mints, custom houses, etc.,
  etc., long before Mr. Lincoln was installed, and before the South
  had one jot or tittle of provocation. I myself have seen in
  Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee and part of Mississippi, hundreds and
  thousands of women and children, fleeing from your armies and
  desperadoes, hungry and with bleeding feet. In Memphis, Vicksburg
  and Mississippi, we fed thousands upon thousands of the families of
  rebel soldiers left on our hands, and when we could not see them
  starve. Now that war comes home to you, you feel very different; you
  deprecate its horrors, but did not feel them when you sent car loads
  of soldiers and ammunition, and moulded shell and shot to carry war
  into Kentucky and Tennessee, and desolate the homes of hundreds and
  thousands of good people, who only asked to live in peace at their
  old homes, and under the government of their inheritance. But these
  comparisons are idle. I want peace, and believe it can only be
  reached through union and war, and I will ever conduct war purely
  with a view to perfect and early success. But, my dear sir, when
  that peace does come, you may call on me for anything. Then will I
  share with you the last cracker, and watch with you to shield your
  homes and your families against danger from every quarter. Now you
  must go, and take with you the old and feeble, feed them and nurse
  them, and build for them, in more quiet places, proper habitations
  to shield them against the weather, until the mad passions of war
  cool down, and allow the Union and peace once more to settle on your
  old homes at Atlanta.

                                              Yours in haste.
                                                 W. T. SHERMAN,
                                                        Major General.




                             CHAPTER XXVII.


An armistice of ten days was agreed upon by Gens. Sherman and Hood for
the purpose of carrying out this order. All who desired to go south were
furnished transportation to Rough and Ready Station by Gen. Sherman,
where they were received by the rebel forces. All those preferring to go
north were also furnished by him with transportation. This being
completed, Gen. Sherman began the reorganization of the army, with a
view to future movements. We were re-clothed and equipped, and the
stains and marks of our long and arduous campaign passed away.

On the 23rd day of September the division of which the 3rd brigade was a
part, under command of Gen. J. D. Morgan, began a forced march to north
Alabama _via_ Chattanooga in pursuit of Gen. Forest's cavalry, then as
far to our rear as middle and west Tennessee, and whose presence daily
jeopardized our "cracker line." The command returned on the 15th of
November, having been gone 48 days, and completed, as is claimed by
those who made it, one of the most difficult and laborious marches of
the war. It was not the good fortune of the writer to be with the troops
on this trip, and he is obliged to refer the readers to the subjoined
reports for such detailed information as they contain, assuring you,
however, that the 125th bore itself as grandly as on all other
occasions. In the meantime we will try to tell you what the army
encamped in and about Atlanta was doing, as to this we were attached
during the campaign first mentioned. As an army we rested here in our
camp taking our ease, eating our rations, and wondering when the bugle
would again sound the "forward." On the 28th of September, Sherman
became convinced that the enemy intended to assume the offensive. He
sent Thomas to Nashville to organize the new troops who were arriving
there, and a new line of works around Atlanta were completed, which
would only require a small garrison to hold. And now we come to the
relation of the grandest campaign that has ever been made in modern
times. Like the Roman general who burned his ship, on landing on the
enemy's shores, so that his army could have no avenue of retreat, so
Sherman, when his orders had been carried out and everything was in
readiness, on the 12th day of November, 1864, severed his communications
with the north. On that day the last train of cars whirled rapidly past
us, speeding over bridges and into the woods as if afraid of being left
helpless and alone in the deserted land. At Cartersville the last
communication by telegraph with the north was severed. It bore the
message to Gen. Thomas at Nashville, "all is well." The army with which
Sherman made the "march to the sea," was composed of the fifteenth and
seventeenth corps, forming the right wing, under Maj. Gen. O. O. Howard,
the fourteenth (our corps) and the twentieth corps forming the left
wing, under the command of Maj. Gen. H. W. Slocum, making an aggregate
strength of 60,000 infantry; one cavalry division, to aggregate 5,500
men, under Brig. Gen. Judson Kilpatrick, and the artillery reduced to
the minimum, one gun for 1000 men. On the 16th we left Atlanta with Gen.
Sherman in person, and moved by Lithonia, Covington and Shady Dale
directly on Milledgville, the capitol of the state. All the troops were
provided with good wagon trains loaded with ammunition and supplies,
approximating twenty days bread, forty days sugar and coffee, a double
allowance of salt for forty days, and beef cattle equal to forty days'
supplies. The wagons also were supplied with about three days forage in
grain. All were instructed, by a judicious system of foraging, to
maintain this order of things as long as possible, living chiefly, if
not solely, upon the country, which was known to abound in corn, sweet
potatoes and meats. But on the night of the 15th, before leaving
Atlanta, a grand and awful sight was witnessed by many beholders. By
order, the chief engineer destroyed by powder and fire all the store
houses, depot buildings and machine shops. The heaven was one expanse of
lurid fire: the air was filled with flying, burning cinders. Buildings
covering over two hundred acres of ground were in ruins or in flames.
Every instant there was the sharp report, or the smothered burning sound
of exploding shells and powder concealed in the building, and then the
sparks and flames shooting away up in the black and red roof, scattering
the cinders far and wide. These were the machine shops where had been
forged and cast, cannon, shot and shell that had carried death to many a
brave boy. These warehouses had been the receptacle of munitions of war,
stored to be used in slaughtering the men who were now witnessing their
destruction. The city which, next to Richmond, had furnished more
material for prosecuting the war than any other in the south, existed no
more as a means of aid for enemies of the union. Nothing remained but
its dwelling houses and churches. On the 8th day after leaving Atlanta,
that is the 23rd, we marched through and occupied Milledgville, the
capitol of the state. The legislature had been in session, but on
hearing of our approach it broke up and fled. The alarm of its members
was communicated to the people, and the place was practically
depopulated, no one remaining but a few old ladies and gentlemen and the
negroes, the latter welcoming with glad shouts the arrival of the union
army, filling the air with such exclamations as: "Bress de Lord! Tanks
be to Almighty God, the yank is come. De day ob jubilee hab aribed." And
then they would grab any fellow who happened to be near them, and hug
him liberally. But we were not to remain here; two or three regiments
were detailed, under the orders of the engineers, to destroy certain
property designated by the general commanding. The magazines, arsenals,
depot buildings, factories of one kind and another, with store houses,
large amounts of government property, and some 1700 bales of cotton were
burned. Private houses, however, were respected everywhere, even those
known to be the property of rebels then in the field. One or two
citizens, who were known to have been in the rebel army, were made
prisoners of war, but the surgeons at the hospitals, the principal of
the insane asylum and others expressed their thanks that such good order
was preserved in the city. From here our corps marched to Sandersville,
which we reached the next day, skirmishing most of the way with
Wheeler's cavalry.

On the 3rd of December we were in the neighborhood of Lumpkin's station
on the Augusta rail road; all were ordered to march in the direction of
Savannah; our corps following the Savannah river road. There was no
fighting, save once in a while a little skirmish with rebel cavalry. The
only battle, if so it may be termed, was fought by General Kilpatrick's
cavalry, supported by General Baird's division of our corps, with
Wheeler's cavalry in the neighborhood of Thomas' station, whom
Kilpatrick whipped handsomely. We were drawing near Savannah, and the
country became more marshy and difficult, and more obstacles were met in
the shape of felled trees, wherever the road crossed creeks, swamps, or
narrow causeways; but the negroes who had flocked to us were utilized,
and armed with axes and shovels, formed into pioneer companies, and with
incredible swiftness they would remove the obstructions. No opposition
from the enemy worth speaking of, was encountered, until we were within
about fifteen miles of Savannah, where all the roads were obstructed
with felled timber, earth works and artillery. The roads were sandy, and
straight almost as an arrow. One afternoon as we were marching along, we
were surprised by the whizzing of a shell, which came flying down the
road over our heads, and then another and another. The brigade was
quickly moved off the road by the right flank and formed in line of
battle. Lieutenant Coe, in command of our battery, with his usual
rashness, went tearing up the road on his horse to find position for his
guns. He saw the rebel works stationed in the center of the road ahead
of him. Sitting there on his horse, fearless of danger, looking for a
good position for the battery, a solid shot came whirling along and tore
his right shoulder off, killing him instantly. The sergeant took
command, and soon our battery was giving them as good as they sent. We
want to record it here, that we thought our battery, "I" company, of the
2nd Ills. artillery, was the best in the service. It had been under good
discipline, and was as an effective body of men as we ever saw while in
the army. We had been together ever since we left Louisville, and some
of our boys had been detailed for duty in the battery, so we had come to
regard them as part of ourselves.

Our line of battle with skirmishers thrown out, had now advanced, but
owing to a large, deep swamp in our front, and the lateness of the
afternoon, as it was nearly dark, we halted for the night. In the
morning, the skirmishers advancing, found the works deserted. We were
now getting very close to the city, and on the 17th, General Sherman
dispatched to Savannah, by flag of truce, a formal demand for the
surrender of the place, and on the following day received a refusal from
General Hardee, who was in command. We received orders to closely invest
the city, and to reconnoiter well the ground in our front, and make all
preparations for assaulting the place. But Hardee recognized the utter
impossibility of holding the town with all his supply sources cut off,
and an enemy in front of him who had successfully marched through the
heart of the Confederacy, evacuated the city on the night of the 20th,
first blowing up and burning the rebel iron clads and three transports.
On the 13th of December, communication with the fleet in Tybee, Warsaw
and Ossabaw Sounds, that had been watching and waiting for us, was
opened up, and on the same day Brigadier General Hazen with the second
division of the fifteenth corps, carried by assault Fort McAllister,
manned by two companies of artillery, and three of infantry, in all
about two hundred men, and mounting twenty three guns and one mortar.
Savannah lay at the feet of its conquerors. The fruits of this almost
bloodless campaign, a campaign that would have been creditable to the
genius of a Napoleon, or a Wellington, were Savannah, a city of twenty
thousand inhabitants, and of great importance to us as a harbor; more
than 1000 prisoners, 150 guns, 13 locomotives in good order, 190 cars, a
very large quantity of ammunition and material of war, 3 steamers, and
3,200 bales of cotton. All this General Sherman offered to President
Lincoln as a Christmas gift. There were also more than 15,000 slaves
gathered into our lines, some of whom proved of great use to the army.
Such were the great results of the capture of Savannah, but the greatest
were those made possible only, by this success.




                            CHAPTER XXVIII.


We remained at Savannah nearly a month, refitting and repairing for the
next campaign. Christmas day was passed here, but there was no Christmas
trees, nor did any Santa Claus appear to reward us for our good
behavior. We had been paid off before leaving Atlanta, and consequently
there was a good deal of money in camp, and the "chuck-a-luck" gamesters
were in the height of their season. Gambling was positively against
orders, but all the same it was carried on, and wherever a squad of men
could be seen grouped together, you might be sure there was a
chuck-a-luck board in full play. The guards detailed to arrest these
fellows, had a lively time of it. Every point of strategy of which they
were cognizant, was employed to bring the offenders to justice. Coming
on them by a flank movement, surrounding them, or approaching them by a
direct charge on the double quick. All their manœuvering generally came
to naught, for some one was always on the lookout, and was sure to see
the first appearance of danger, and with a shout would give the alarm,
when all would take to their heels, leaving the pursuers to reflect on
the uselessness of their endeavors. But sometimes the guards would make
a capture, and march the luckless offenders off to headquarters, where,
after receiving a lecture on the immoral practice of gambling in
general, and of chuck-a-luck in particular, he would be ordered to stand
on a barrel, or carry a rail on his shoulder for a few hours.

Savannah is a beautiful city, the streets are wide and lined with live
oak trees, with promenades beneath them, and the dwelling houses are
very handsome, the yards and gardens are filled with the richest and
most varied kind of plants and shrubs. Here we saw the monument erected
to the memory of Count Pulaski, a beautiful shaft, covered at its base
with appropriate inscriptions, recording, in letters of stone, the
memory of him in whose honor it was raised. The city has some charming
parks, and when not on duty, we would pass the time rambling around and
noting all that was to be seen. Here one day the writer and a comrade,
having secured the necessary pass, proceeded to the river, and obtaining
a boat, pushed off, bound on a visit to the gunboat Wissahickon, then
anchored in the stream below the city, her crew being employed in
fishing for torpedoes which the rebels had thrown into the channel of
the river, in order that they might blow up our vessels as they
proceeded up the stream to the wharfs. We had a pleasant row, and an
equally pleasant visit with the officers and crew. We were the first of
Sherman's men that they had seen, and they were very anxious to know the
particulars of the march; we told them our adventures since leaving
Atlanta, which seemed greatly to excite their wonder and admiration. We
left the Wissahicken with kindly feelings for all on board, and as we
pulled up the river back toward the city, we sang:

              "The Army and Navy ne'er sever,
                But still to their colors prove true,
              It's the Army and Navy forever,
                Three cheers for the Red, White and Blue."

We arrived safely in camp, feeling that we had passed a pleasant day.

When we arrived at Savannah we were the proud owner of a very large red
rooster, whom we named "Jeremiah," but for short we generally addressed
him as "Jerry." He was a character, if ever a rooster could be termed
such, and if he had not acquired a great knowledge as the man's chickens
who, on account of his many moves and changes, they had got so in the
habit of having their legs tied, that they would, whenever they saw a
covered wagon, run into the front yard, fall on their backs, and cross
their legs ready for tieing; if Jeremiah had not learnt this much, he
still was very easily managed, and would stand round of a morning while
"Dick," our darkey, was loading down our pack mule with blankets, and
other necessaries, getting ready for the march, and when it came time
for "Jerry" to be lifted to his place on top of the load, he would make
no objection, but would suffer himself to be tied on securely, and there
he would ride all day. This had come to be such an every day matter,
that it was almost a second nature to him, and his amazement was great,
when day after day passed, and he was not called on to take his
accustomed place on top of our portable treasures. "Jeremiah" waxed-fat,
and would every now and then express his satisfaction at the situation,
by a shrill crow. But the boys were getting tired of him, for in spite
of our endeavors "Jerry" would somehow manage to get in our tents, and
sleep, and at the first dawn of day, his crow would ring upon our ears.
This was all right enough while we were on the march, but now that we
were in camp, they failed to appreciate it, so threats of vengeance were
loudly made. We begged and plead for him, but all to no purpose, "they
were not going to have that miserable rooster crowing in their ears
every morning," they said, so finally we had to yield to the pressure of
public opinion, and gave the order for "Jerry" to be executed, which was
accordingly done, and we whetted our teeth to devour him. "Jeremiah" was
undoubtedly an old bird, for constant boiling all day, failed to render
him tender. But we had a feast, all the same, as "Jerry," after being
cut up in small pieces, and having for accompaniment a large piece of
pork, and a handful or two of hardtack, made a camp kettle full of food.
We picked poor "Jerry's" bones clean, thereby proving, although in
different words, the truth of the old adage, "the big roosters eat up
the little ones."

[Illustration]




                             CHAPTER XXIX.


Here at Savannah we fared sumptuously on oysters and fresh fish. Every
evening the negroes would come up to the city from the mouth of the
river, with their boat loads of oysters. These we purchased at the rate
of one dollar per bushel, and taking them to camp would throw them on
the fire, and let them roast, the opening of the shell indicating when
the bivalve was thoroughly cooked. Many a feast of this sort did we have
while there. But our feasting and merry making was rudely ended by the
bugle one morning sounding the call to "strike tents." Everything was
ready, and we were now to leave Savannah, and commence the march which
ended at Washington. The city of Savannah and the forts around it were
transferred to Gen. Foster, commanding the department of the south, and
on the 19th of January, 1865, all preparations were completed and the
march commenced. The weather was very bad, the January rains had
commenced to fall, swelling the Savannah river, overflowing its bottoms
and making the roads miserable. This made no difference, however, to our
general, so we marched up the river to Sisters Ferry, but owing to the
high state of the water, and the difficulty in laying the pontoons, we
did not succeed in getting everything across, until the first week in
February. And now we entered on the soil of South Carolina, and the
feelings of the men were openly expressed as they stepped off of the
pontoons, by the declaration that now they were in the state which had
caused more trouble than any other state in the union. We were behind
the rest of the army owing to the difficulties encountered in crossing
the Savannah, and so we had to march rapidly to overtake the right wing,
but at last we caught up with it. Foraging was again the order of the
day, we were compelled to subsist off of the country through which we
passed. Every morning a detail of two men from each company would be
made, making twenty men to a regiment. They were put under command of a
commissioned officer, and would leave camp about an hour before the army
moved. These men would strike off into the country around and gather up
all the provisions they could find, and towards evening would turn their
steps towards the roads on which the corps was marching. They would come
into camp in all styles of transportation. Here would be a couple of
fellows, who in their wanderings had found a fine buggy or carriage;
hunting up a mule or a horse, they would hitch him to the vehicle, and
loading it down with the proceeds of their day's search, would come
gravely riding into camp amid the laughter of all who saw them. Or some
other squad had come across a grist mill, and if there was no grist on
hand to be ground, they would soon procure some from somebody's
corn-field or granary, and starting up the machinery would grind it in
good workmanlike style, load it into an old wagon or anything they could
find and bring it into camp, burning the mill to the ground, however,
before leaving it. Others would make their appearance riding on some old
mule or horse, which they had picked up, loaded down with hams, bacon,
chickens, sweet potatoes or whatever they could find. By these means we
were provided with plenty of food and in great variety. The army
occupied four roads travelling parallel to each other, and the location
of each corps could be easily known by the cloud of smoke that hovered
over it by day, and the light of the camp fires which lit up the heavens
at night. Our march through South Carolina, often recalled to our minds
the wanderings of the children of Israel in the wilderness when the Lord
went before them by day in a pillar of cloud, and by night in a pillar
of fire. Our line of march extended over a strip of country nearly sixty
miles in width, and with the exception of the negro huts, this land was
stripped of everything. There were undoubtedly many acts of wanton
cruelty and villainous outrage committed by some, but the mass of the
army was opposed to such actions, and loudly condemned them. Of course,
in an army the size of ours, there were all phases of humanity, and it
was plainly seen that the members of regiments, which had been made up
in some of our large cities, were oftener guilty of acts of violence
than men from regiments which had been formed in the agricultural parts
of the country. This was entirely logical, as the reader can easily
understand. The weather still continued rainy, and the roads were
terrible, often requiring the severest labor on the part of all to make
them passable for our teams, by corduroying them. At last we reached the
banks of the Congaree, on the other side of which the city of Columbia,
the capitol of the state, was situated, and on the night of February the
15th, the enemy amused themselves by shelling our camps from a battery
posted on that side of the river. And now we come to a matter, which,
although not having any particular bearing on the regiment, as we did
not come within two miles of the city, still as a part of the army then
in front of Columbia, we must suffer in common with other regiments from
the stigma the rebels sought to cast upon our arms, by the destruction
of that city by fire on the night of the 17th of February. Major General
Howard had received orders from the general commanding, to destroy
absolutely all arsenals and public property not needed for the use of
our army, as well as railroads, depots and machinery useful in war to an
enemy, but to spare all dwellings, colleges, schools, asylums, and
harmless private property. The day of the occupation of Columbia was
clear, but a tremendous wind was blowing. One brigade of our army was in
the city and properly posted. Citizens and soldiers were on the streets,
and good order prevailed. General Wade Hampton, who commanded the rebel
rear guard of cavalry, had, in anticipation of the capture of Columbia,
ordered that all cotton, public and private, should be moved into the
streets and fired. Bales were piled everywhere, the rope and bagging
cut, and tufts of cotton were blown about in the wind, lodged in the
trees and against houses, so as to resemble a snow storm. Some of these
piles of cotton were burning, especially one in the very heart of the
city, near the court-house, but the fire was partially subdued by the
labor of our soldiers. Before one single public building had been fired
by order, the smoldering fires, set by Hampton's orders, were rekindled
by the wind and communicated to the buildings around. About dark they
had began to spread and get beyond the control of the brigade on duty in
the city. A whole division was brought in, but it was found impossible
to check the flames, which by midnight, had become unmanageable and
raged until about four a. m., when the wind subsiding, they were brought
under control. Gen. Sherman in his report says:

"I was up nearly all night and saw Generals Howard, Logan and Wood and
others laboring to save houses and protect families thus suddenly
deprived of shelter, and of bedding, and wearing apparel. I disclaim, on
the part of my army, any agency in this fire, but, on the contrary,
claim that we saved what of Columbia remains unconsumed. And without
hesitation I charge General Wade Hampton with having burned his own city
of Columbia, not with a malicious intent, or as the manifestation of a
silly "Roman Stoicism," but from folly and want of sense in filling it
with lint, cotton and tinder. Our officers and men on duty worked well
to extinguish the flames, but others not on duty, including the officers
who had long been imprisoned there, rescued by us, may have assisted in
spreading the fire after it had once begun, and may have indulged in
unconcealed joy to see the ruin of the capitol of South Carolina. Thus
ends the account of the destruction of Columbia." We shall not enter
into any discussion of the matter, as we firmly believe, along with Gen.
Sherman, that it was all caused by the folly or ignorance of Gen. Wade
Hampton.




                              CHAPTER XXX.


It was now the 21st of February, and our wing of the army had reached
Winnsboro, where we went to work destroying the rail road up to
Blackstake's depot, and then turned to Rocky Mount, on the Catawba
river. From the 23rd to the 26th, heavy rains fell swelling the rivers,
and making the roads almost impassable. On the 26th we reached Hanging
Rock, and made preparations to cross the river, but the heavy rains had
so swollen the stream, that our pontoon bridge broke, and we had hard
work to restore it. At last we succeeded, and were put in motion for
Cheraw, which place we entered on the 3rd day of March; the enemy
retreating across the Pedee river and burning the bridge. Here we found
much ammunition, and many guns which had been brought from Charleston on
the evacuation of that city. These were destroyed, as also the rail road
bridges and trestles as far down as Darlington, when we were again put
in motion for Fayetteville, North Carolina. The weather still continued
bad and the roads fearful, but we reached there on the 11th of March,
skirmishing with Wade Hampton's cavalry that covered the rear of
Hardee's retreating army. During the night of the 9th, Hampton made a
dash on our cavalry on our left flank at daylight and captured one of
their camps, and the house in which General Kilpatrick had his
headquarters. But Kilpatrick escaped in his underclothes and rallying
his men on foot in a swamp near by, succeeded in routing the enemy,
regaining his artillery, horses, camp and everything, save a few
prisoners whom the enemy carried off, leaving their dead on the ground.
All that day, the cavalry boys who had made their escape after being
taken prisoners by the enemy, kept coming into our line of march, some
of them without hats, coats or shoes, all of them on foot. But they soon
left us and returned to their command. Their appearance, however, was
ludicrous, and their accounts of how they came to be captured, were
generally the same. The way in which it happened was this: During the
night of the 9th, General Kilpatrick had divided his three brigades to
picket the roads. Hampton, detecting this, dashed in at daylight, and
made the capture. The 12th, 13th and 14th, were passed at Fayetteville,
destroying the arsenal and the vast amount of machinery which had
formerly belonged to the old Harper's Ferry United States arsenal. Every
building was knocked down and burned, and every piece of machinery
utterly broken up and ruined. On the 15th of March we again moved
forward, the cavalry marching in advance and skirmishing heavily with
the enemy's rear guard all day. Next morning we again advanced in the
same order, and developed the enemy with artillery, infantry and
cavalry, in an intrenched position in front of the point where the road
branches off towards Goldsboro through Bentonville. Orders were given to
press forward and carry his position, only difficult by reason of the
nature of the ground, which was so soft that horses would sink
everywhere, and even men could hardly make their way. Line of battle was
formed as quickly as possible, and skirmishers thrown out, who soon
developed the position of a brigade of Charleston heavy artillery armed
as infantry, posted across the road behind a light parapet, with a
battery enfilading the approach across a cleared field, but they
retreated in confusion, leaving in our hands three guns, and 217
prisoners, of which 68 were wounded and left in a house near by with a
rebel officer, four men and five days rations. One hundred and eighty
rebel dead were buried by us. Hardee retreated on the road to
Smithfield. This was the battle of Averysboro. We lost 12 officers and
65 men killed, and 477 wounded, but no prisoners. On the night of the
18th we went into camp on the Goldsboro road, twenty-seven miles from
Goldsboro, and about five miles from Bentonville, where the road from
Clinton to Smithfield crosses the Goldsboro road. The enemy was badly
defeated, and all indications pointed that he would make no further
opposition to our advance, but subsequent events proved that such was
not the case. We were now marching on Goldsboro, in North Carolina, our
objective point. On the morning of the 19th, we pushed forward to
Bentonville, encountering on the road, and driving them before us,
Dibbrell's cavalry, until within a few miles of the town, where we found
the whole rebel army, strongly posted, under command of Johnston
himself. Gen. Sherman had gone, that morning, with his staff and escort,
over to the right. He was promptly advised as to how matters stood, and
we were ordered to act on the defensive until Blair's corps could draw
up, and the three remaining divisions of the fifteenth corps could come
in on Johnston's left rear, from the direction of Cox's bridge. In the
mean time we received word, by courier, that Schofield and Terry would
be able to reach Goldsboro by the 21st. Orders were sent to Schofield to
push for Goldsboro. By daylight on the 20th, General Howard, leaving his
wagon train with sufficient guard, was marching rapidly on Bentonville.
And now we come to the battle of Bentonville. Our advance guard,
consisting of two brigades, was vigorously attacked, and driven back on
our main body, by the enemy, who thereby gained a temporary advantage,
and captured three guns and caissons from General Carlin's division of
our corps. As soon, however, as General Slocum ascertained that he was
confronted by the whole rebel army, he deployed the second division of
our corps, to which our regiment belonged, and brought up on our left
the second division of the 20th corps, arranging them behind hastily
constructed barricades, and holding them strictly on the defensive.
Kilpatrick with his cavalry also came up at the sound of artillery, and
massed on our left. In this position we repulsed, without giving an inch
of ground, six distinct charges of the combined forces of Hoke, Hardee
and Cheatham. Our artillery got into position, and played on the rebel
ranks as they came up to the charge, doing fearful execution; the
slaughter was terrible. Johnston had moved the night before from
Smithfield, leaving all his unnecessary wheels behind him, and but with
little artillery, with the intention of overwhelming our left flank
before it could be relieved by our other column coming to our
assistance, but Johnston had not yet learned that the eye of Sherman was
always on the watch, and that he was prepared for any emergency that
might arise. During the night of the 19th, Gen. Slocum got up the wagon
train with the two divisions guarding it, and General Hazen's division
of the 15th corps. This reinforcement made it impossible for Johnston to
overwhelm us. The right wing encountered the rebel cavalry, as it was
coming to our support, but drove it with serious loss until the head of
the column encountered a considerable body behind a barricade at the
forks of the road near Bentonville, about three miles east of the battle
field of the day before. This force was quickly dislodged and the
intersection of the roads secured. These movements which were being made
were all accomplished by 4 p. m. of the 20th, when we opened out to the
astonished gaze of General Johnston, a complete and strong line of
battle. His intention of crushing and capturing our left wing, was
completely foiled, and instead of being the aggressor, he found himself
placed on the defensive, with Mill creek in his rear, spanned by a
single bridge. It was General Sherman's desire to hold the enemy in
position until Generals Schofield and Terry could advance and cut off
his retreat, thus completely "bagging" him, so he did not press him to
battle, but continued to annoy him with the skirmishers, using the
artillery freely on all the wooded ground in front, and feeling strongly
for the flanks of his position, which were found to be covered by
swamps. All of our empty wagons were sent to Kinston for supplies, and
all other impediments were grouped south of Goldsboro, near the Neuse
river, while the main army were held ready to fight the enemy if he
should dare venture out of his works. A weakness in the enemy's position
had been developed, of which advantage might be taken, but that night he
retreated on Smithfield, leaving his pickets to be taken prisoners, many
dead unburied, and wounded in his field hospitals. Pursuit was made on
the morning of the 22nd, two miles beyond Mill creek, but was then
stopped. Our loss in this engagement was 1,646 killed, wounded and
missing. The enemy left 267 dead unburied, and 1,625 prisoners. For a
more detailed account of the operations of the brigade and regiment, the
reader will please to consult the reports attached to this history. By
the evening of the 24th, our army was encamped at Goldsboro. On the
25th, only four days after, the rail road from Newbern was finished, and
the first train of cars arrived, bringing ample supplies of all
descriptions from Morehead City. It will never be known with any degree
of certainty, the amount of injury done the enemy in this campaign, or
the quantity of guns, and materials of war, destroyed. We had traveled
the country from Savannah to Goldsboro, with an average breadth of forty
miles, and had consumed all the forage, cattle, hogs, sheep, poultry,
bacon and corn meal that lay in our route. The campaign was ended on the
21st day of March, by the junction of the three armies and the
occupation of Goldsboro. We went into camp, where clothing, and supplies
were issued to us as fast as they could be brought up from the coast.

[Illustration]




                             CHAPTER XXXI.


On Monday the 10th of April all preparations were completed for our
further advance. On the 11th we moved out of camp and marched about
seven miles, and on the next day the 12th, the march began in earnest.
Foraging was continued as heretofore, but orders were given to use more
prudence, and not go in advance of the advance guard, but to look more
to the right rear for our supplies of corn meal, bacon, etc. Our wing,
the left, was to aim straight for the railroad bridge near Smithfield,
thence up the Neuse river to the railroad bridge over that stream, north
east of Raleigh, then to Warrenton where the army would concentrate.
Johnston had his army well in hand about Smithfield. It was estimated at
infantry and artillery, 35,000; cavalry from 6,000 to 10,000. We pressed
the enemy closely, and by 10 a. m. of the 13th, our corps entered
Smithfield closely followed by the 20th. Johnston had loaded his trains
on the cars and retreated, burning the bridge over the Neuse river at
Smithfield. The pontoons were brought up and the crossing of the army
commenced without resistance.

Here it was that the glorious news reached us that Lee had surrendered
his army to General Grant at Appomattox. We had arisen at the usual
hour, and the bugle sounded the assembly, when off to our left
cannonading and shouting were heard; we could not account for it, what
did it mean? A staff officer of our brigade, with an orderly, was
dispatched to find out what was the meaning of the cannonading. He
returned with the startling and welcome news that Lee had surrendered.
We could hardly believe it, and finally concluded it was a camp rumor,
but our doubts were soon dispelled by Capt. Wiseman, the division
adjutant general, hastily riding up and requesting Col. Langley, in
command of the brigade, to draw up the command in close column by
regiments. The request was quickly complied with and he then proceeded
to read to us the official announcement of the surrender. What a sight
was then witnessed. For a time all discipline was cast aside and we made
the pine woods ring "with the glad tidings of great joy." The artillery
boys had seized the guns of the battery and were sending forth from the
grizzly mouths of the cannon, round after round. The officers were
seized and carried around on the shoulders of the men, strong men wept
and embraced each other, and the air was filled with knapsacks and hats
flung up in the exuberance of our joy. We felt as if the war was over,
as for Johnston's army we had no fear of them, for we knew that we would
run him like a rat to his hole, before many days would pass. Were we
going to get home at last? Was the cruel war over? These were the
questions asked on all sides. We moved out of camp that morning in the
highest possible spirits. General Sherman issued orders to drop all
trains, and we marched in pursuit of Johnston to and through Raleigh,
the capitol of the state, reaching that place on the morning of the
13th. During the next two days the cavalry and the different corps were
pushed forward, menacing the enemy in front, flank and rear, with
Johnston's army retreating rapidly on the roads from Hillsboro to
Greensboro, Johnston himself being at Greensboro. Thus matters stood
when Gen. Sherman received a communication from Gen. Johnston,
requesting an armistice, and a statement of the best terms on which he
would be permitted to surrender the army under his command. To this Gen.
Sherman promptly returned answer:

  "I am fully empowered to arrange with you any terms for the
  suspension of the hostilities, as between the armies commanded by
  you and those commanded by myself, and am willing to confer with you
  to that end. That a base of action may be had, I undertake to abide
  by the same terms and conditions entered into by Gens. Grant and
  Lee, at Appomattox court-house, Virginia, on the 9th instant."

These pages were intended to be a history or record of a single regiment
in Sherman's army, but as it is intended, also, to be a record of all
the events happening to that portion of the army of which our regiment
was a part, we have inserted some things among our pages which perhaps
may not seem at a first glance, to the reader, to be pertinent to the
subject, but which will, we trust, on second thought be considered
admissible. We have followed the fortunes of our arms from Kentucky
through Tennessee, Georgia, South Carolina and North Carolina, and
before we arrive at home will have to go into Virginia and the District
of Columbia, so from this on we shall record events as they happened,
without consideration altogether as to the particular movements of our
own regiment, for we think that the affairs which happened in such close
succession at the close of the rebellion are all matters of interest,
and should always be kept alive in the memories of our people, showing
how a great rebellion that had been secretly coming to a head for thirty
years was crushed, the perpetrators of it allowed to live, through the
magnanimity of our government, and slavery in America forever blotted
out; removing from our national banner the odium which had rested on it
by this foul blot, but which now floats over all our land as the emblem
of the free, and respected in every port and harbor of the known world.
With this apology, although we do not think it will be deemed necessary
by our readers, we will proceed with our writing. The dispatch, to which
we have referred, from some cause or other was delayed, and Johnston's
answer was not received until late in the day of the 16th. In Johnston's
reply he requested an interview with General Sherman near Durham
Station, with a view to arranging terms of capitulation. General Sherman
fixed the time for the interview at 12 m. on the 17th. The meeting was
held according to appointment, and Johnston acknowledged the terms to be
fair and liberal, but asked the consideration of additional facts. He
stated that the treaty between Gens. Grant and Lee had reference to a
part only of the confederate forces, whereas he proposed the present
agreement should include all the remaining armies of the rebels, and
thus the war should be at an end. He frankly admitted that the cause was
lost, that there was no longer any hopes for the success of the
confederacy, and that slavery, state rights and every other cause for
which the war had been inaugurated was lost, never to be recovered. He
desired that the fragments of the confederate armies might preserve
their company and regimental organizations, and be marched to the states
where they belonged, in such order, to prevent their being broken up
into predatory bands to overrun the country and vex the inhabitants;
that this was a favorable occasion to inaugurate the beginning of a
period of peace and good will between the people destined to live under
the same government. The proposal was a most flattering one, calculated
to dazzle the mind and awaken the pride of almost any man, laying claim
to the possession of the most ordinary ambition. To be the happy
instrument of bringing again to his country, so long devastated with
violence, rapine and death, the glorious boon of peace, by a single
stroke of diplomacy, was of itself sufficient to place the author in the
front rank with the greatest men of his time, and hand down to posterity
his name as the savior of his country. Such a brilliant vision may have
flitted before the mind of Sherman. But did these men have the necessary
authority? Could they bind their government, their superiors, to such
terms as they might arrange between themselves? Gen. Sherman thought
not, but Johnston assured him that having the rebel secretary of war,
Breckenridge, with him, and it having been Mr. Lincoln's repeated
declaration, that he was willing to negotiate a peace with any person
who could control the rebel armies, he saw no reason why so desirable an
end should not be consummated, and asked that the conference might be
adjourned over until the next day, to enable him to confer with
Breckenridge. This was agreed on, and the conference was adjourned until
the next day at 12 m. at the same place.




                             CHAPTER XXXII.


On the 17th of April, the same day on which General Sherman was
negotiating with Johnston for the surrender of the rebel army then under
his command, we received the appalling news of the assassination of our
beloved president, Abraham Lincoln. It cast a gloom over us all, and to
say that our hearts were saddened by the news, would express the
sentiment that was felt in too meagre terms. We felt, individually, as
if we had lost a near and dear friend.

Our army was encamped, as we have before stated, on the southern bank of
the Neuse river, pending negotiations, of which we were all aware, of
the surrender of the army which we had followed so long, and to which we
had given battle on many a bloody field. But now, on that Sabbath
afternoon, all was still, no noise could be heard, and if one had not
known that a large army was encamped there, they never would have
suspected it; the silence was awful, men spoke to each other with bated
breath; the glitter of the eye, and the tension of the mouth, were
indications that were terrible to behold. What! after all our marching,
after all our fighting, after all the hardships and privations we had
endured, after the four long years of bloody war, during which time our
President had sat in the chair of State, and with a wisdom never
excelled, and but rarely equalled, had guided the Ship of State aright,
after all this, and now that the blood which had been shed, the treasure
that had been expended, the arduous labors which we had undergone, were
about to be rewarded with the crown of victory, was he not to welcome
his boys home again? We could hardly realize it. But the reaction came;
the news was true, and it was the feeling in every breast, that
vengeance on the people, who, by their mad actions had brought all this
trouble on us, must be executed. The Neuse river only lay between us and
Johnston's army, it would have been a matter in which our army would
have rejoiced, to cross the river and wipe those men from off the face
of the earth. They were the upholders of the cause that had brought, in
its bloody train, the assassination of our President, and blood could
only heal the sorrow it had caused. All that was needed to cause the
slumbering volcano to pour forth its streams of devastation and woe, was
some leading spirit to burst the restraints of discipline, and the
beautiful city of Raleigh would soon have been but a heap of blackened
ruins. Such were the feelings of General Sherman's army when that sad
news first fell upon us like a funeral pall. But for fear of an
outbreak, orders were issued denying the report, and it was so horrible,
we were willing to believe it, and the smothered rage cooled down to
unexecuted threats. At the appointed time on the 18th, negotiations were
resumed between Generals Sherman and Johnston. After the first meeting
General Sherman had conferred with his principal officers, all of whom
favored a treaty on the basis proposed by Johnston, and General Sherman
himself drew up the following memoranda or basis of agreement:

  "Memoranda or basis of agreement made this 18th day of April, A. D.
  1865, near Durham's station, in the State of North Carolina, by and
  between General Joseph E. Johnston, commanding the Confederate army,
  and Major General William T. Sherman, commanding the army of the
  United States in North Carolina, both present.

  First. The contending armies now in the field, to maintain their
  _statu quo_ until notice is given by the commanding general of
  either one to his opponent, and reasonable time, say forty-eight
  hours, allowed.

  Second. The confederate armies now in existence to be disbanded, and
  conducted to the several state capitols, there to deposit their arms
  and public property in the state arsenal, and each officer and man
  to execute and file an agreement to cease from acts of war, and
  abide the action of both state and federal authorities. The number
  of arms and munitions of war to be reported to the Chief of
  Ordnance, at Washington City, subject to future action of the
  Congress of the United States, and in the mean time to be used
  solely to maintain order within the borders of the states
  respectively.

  Third. The recognition by the Executive of the United States of the
  several state governments, on their officers and legislatures taking
  the oath prescribed by the Constitution of the United States, and
  when conflicting state governments have resulted from the war, the
  legitimacy of all shall be submitted to the Supreme Court of the
  United States.

  Fourth. The re-establishment of all Federal Courts in the several
  states, with powers as defined by the Constitution and laws of
  Congress.

  Fifth. The people, and inhabitants of all the states to be
  guaranteed, so far as the executive can, their political rights and
  franchise, as well as their rights of person and property, as
  defined by the Constitution of the United States, and states
  respectively.

  Sixth. The Executive authority of the Government of the United
  States, not to disturb any of the people by reason of the late war,
  so long as they live in peace and quiet, abstain from acts of armed
  hostility, and obey laws in existence at any place of their
  residence.

  Seventh. In general terms, war to cease, and a general amnesty, so
  far as the Executive power of the United States can command, or on
  condition of disbandment of the Confederate armies, and the
  distribution of arms, and resumption of peaceful pursuits by
  officers and men as hitherto composing the said armies. Not being
  fully empowered by our own respective principals to fulfill these
  terms, we individually and officially pledge ourselves to promptly
  obtain necessary authority, and to carry out the above programme.

                            (Signed)  W. T. SHERMAN.
                          Maj. Gen. Comd'g Army of the U. S. in N. C.

                            (Signed) J. E. JOHNSTON.
                                   General Comd'g C. S. Army in N. C."




                            CHAPTER XXXIII.


This memoranda was satisfactory to all present at the conference, as a
proposition to be forwarded by special messenger to the President, who
called a special meeting of the Cabinet to take it into consideration.
The cabinet at once rejected it. This disapproval was communicated to
General Sherman by General Grant, who was ordered by the President to
proceed immediately to the headquarters of General Sherman, and direct
operations against the enemy. The dispatch was received by General
Sherman on the morning of the 24th, and he immediately gave notice to
General Johnston as follows: "You will take notice that the truce, or
suspension of hostilities, agreed to between us on the 18th instant,
will close in forty-eight hours after this is received at your lines."
He also wrote Gen. Johnston at the same time: "I have replies from
Washington to my communication of the 18th. I am instructed to limit my
operations to your immediate command, and not attempt civil
negotiations, I, therefore, demand the surrender of your army, on the
same terms as were given to General Lee, at Appomattox Court House, Va.,
the 9th of April, instant, purely and simply." Within an hour after the
reception of General Grant's dispatch, a courier was riding rapidly with
this notice and demand upon General Johnston. Gen. Sherman also issued
orders to the army to be in readiness to march at 12 m. of the 26th, on
the routs previously described.

These arrangements were already made when General Grant arrived at
Raleigh. He informed General Sherman that he had orders from the
President to direct all military movements, but that he was so well
pleased with the situation, that he concluded not to interfere, and
would leave the execution of the arrangements already made, to General
Sherman. And now, comrade, whoever you may be, who read these pages,
what do you think? This book is not written for any political purpose,
not in the least. We are writing about the times that are past and gone;
about the days when we marched side by side together through the land of
the cotton and the cane. When our glory and our pride was "Uncle Billy,"
whom we would have followed to the end, wherever that may have been, and
you know it. He had been our guiding star in God's hands. Under him we
had gone through campaigns only equalled, but never excelled, in the
annals of war, and now, on the eve of the consummation of our labors,
the "laurel wreath" was to be snatched from his brow, and instead of
being permitted to execute the will of the government as determined upon
by the administration, he was to see another placed in the position
which by right was his. It seemed hardly fair then, and even at this
late day, we cannot think it was. We are no politician, we are not
learned in the mysteries, the devilments, and the general cussedness of
state intrigue, but we say that W. T. Sherman was the grandest man that
ever led an army of the United States, or any other country, and he
showed his grandeur and his nobility by brushing to one side, as he
would the passing wing of a mosquito, the hint of incapacity that was
sought to be fastened on him by those grand and mighty warriors, who, in
their cushion bottomed chairs at Washington, dared for one instant to
insinuate, that it was they who had guided us through the brake, and
through the swamps, from the hillsides of Kentucky, to the walls of
Richmond, by their orders to our general and our leader. But _we_ knew
only Sherman. God bless him, wherever he may be. He is a hero and a
nobleman, not by a long line of ancestral descent, perhaps, but by that
God given inspiration that makes him so. We believe that our comrades of
former days, feel with us an intense loyalty to William Tecumseh
Sherman, a true patriot whom the tinsel, and the glare, of worldly
intrigues, could not swerve from the path of duty. Excuse us, dear
reader, for this little variation, this view that we may have given you
to the secret chamber of our heart, we can not help it, we love the man
of whom we have been writing, and the honor of having been a soldier
under his command, will be one which our children's children, as they
come after us, can reflect upon with pride and glory. But we have
forgotten, it seems to us, who we are, we have been talking to you about
an individual, the most glorious—stop—we will wait until to morrow to go
on with our work, we must not forget the humble position we occupy, that
of giving to you a record of our lives as an army organization.




                             CHAPTER XXXIV.


The bearer of General Sherman's message was an unwelcome visitor at the
headquarters of Gen. Johnston. Johnston was powerless. He could neither
fight nor retreat, his army was deserting him hourly. Already more than
ten thousand of his followers had left him, with their guns, horses,
mules and wagons. He must either disperse his army or surrender it on
the terms proposed by Gen. Sherman on the 25th. He invited Sherman to
another conference, with a view to surrender. Gen. Grant being the
ranking officer, then present, it was his province to take the lead in
the negotiations, but he preferred that the entire business should be
consummated by Gen. Sherman. Write it down in letters of gold, that
there was one man, at least, at those times, who was a man by nature,
and carried a man's heart in his bosom. Thank God! that in our day and
generation, we do stumble across men, although farther apart than many
mile stones, who are willing to give "the spoils to the victor."
Accordingly another interview was arranged to take place at the hour
designated for the termination of the truce. Final terms were conducted
at this conference, substantially the same as given to Lee, and the
second grand army of the cotton aristocracy was surrendered to the
United States. The number of men surrendered and paroled was in the
neighborhood of 25,000; 108 pieces of artillery were parked, with
limbers, caissons, etc., complete; little ammunition was captured. About
15,000 small arms were given up. On the 26th day of April, 1865, the
surrender of the last rebel organization was effected, peace brought to
the land, and the horrible war, which was conceived in sin and brought
forth in iniquity, was over. Fellow soldiers, you who wore the gray,
shake hands, you were brave boys, you were brought into this unholy and
unrighteous war by men who were so unscrupulous as to the means whereby
they attained their ambitious projects, that your heart's blood was but
as water in their sight. All honor to your dead, your valor, and your
bravery. To your leaders, to the men who by their specious talk and
winsome flattery moved you to the struggle, we have nothing to say,
leaving to the God of nations and of worlds their record. He in His own
good time will settle with every one for the deeds done in the body,
whether they be good or whether they be evil.

Well, for us the war was over, and like Othello, "our occupation was
gone." By easy marches we at last reached Richmond, the "city of the
hills," that like ancient Rome, as thought the hearts of many of her
citizens, at the breaking out of the war, "should rule the world." And
as we marched through her streets the thought came into our mind why
"_we_ are Romans." It was but a momentary thought, that we came as
conquerors, and was soon swept from our minds by the idea that we were
merely a large body of police. There had been a big riot, the biggest
kind of a fuss, and we had come to bring the offenders to justice, and
that was the end of it. Brothers and comrades, is that all of it? No!
comes up the voice of the century. Do you call the striking of the
fetters from off 4,000,000 slaves nothing? Do you call the blotting out
of our children's school atlases the "Mason and Dixon's line," which
they used to read there and wonder what it meant, nothing? Do you call
the establishment of our government and free institutions on a rock as
firm as the "Rock of Ages," nothing? Do you call the evidence we have
given to the world, that we are a free and enlightened people, nothing?
Hold on, let us rest at that a moment. The war did amount to something,
didn't it, you old hardtack eater. Shake hands over the trouble and
thank God that we are home at last.

We are almost done now, we have come all the way from Danville,
Illinois, through Kentucky, with her neutrality; through Tennessee with
her splendid water, apple-jack and loyalty in the eastern part, but the
middle and western were bad; through Georgia, with her rice, and
pea-nuts; through South Carolina, with her sweet-potatoes: through North
Carolina, with her tobacco and tar; through Virginia, with her clay
hills and murmuring waters, until we have at last arrived at Washington
with her red tape and capitol airs, but, all the same, the seat of
government of the United States of America, the land of the free and of
the oppressed. But we will stop, we hear some one calling to us to pull
that eagle in. We obey, as a good soldier always does. After taking part
in the grand review at Washington, our regiment "struck tents" for the
last time and went to Chicago.




                             CHAPTER XXXV.


The Saturday after we arrived there, we marched down to Union hall about
11 o'clock in the morning, and took up position in front of the
orchestra. After the band of the Veteran Reserve Corps had discoursed
some of their sweetest music, we were addressed by T. B. Bryan, Esq.,
president of the Soldier's Home, and of the executive committee of the
great sanitary fair. Mr. Bryan said it was his privilege in the name of
the city and the sanitary fair, to welcome us most cordially and
sincerely. As he was to be followed by their distinguished commander,
there was no need for him to speak of our noble deeds. He wanted us,
however, to understand that the men and women of Chicago were equal to
those of any other city in earnest and hearty love for the soldier.
Whatever disaffected people might say to the contrary, we would find
that the women of this city, had toiled as no other women had ever
toiled, to sustain and cheer, to comfort and support, the soldier. If
regiments had at any time come here unnoticed and unknown, it had been
from no fault of theirs. He would now introduce to us our old and tried
commander, General Sherman. The announcement was received with great
applause, which increased as the General stepped to the front. General
Sherman then addressed us as follows:

  "FELLOW SOLDIERS: I regret that it has fallen to my task to speak to
  you, because I would rather that others should do what is most
  common to them, and less so to me. But, my fellow soldiers, it gives
  me pleasure to assure you that what the president of this fair has
  told you just now, is true; that a hearty welcome awaits you
  wherever you go. Many people think you want bread and meat, but your
  faces and my knowledge tell me that you prefer the waving of
  handkerchiefs and the applause of the people, to all the bread and
  meat that fills the warehouses of Chicago (cheers). Those soldiers
  who are now before me, know where bread and meat can and will be
  found (laughter). All we ask, and all we have ever asked, is a
  silent and generous acknowledgement of our services, when rendered
  in the cause of our country. And fellow soldiers, when you get home
  among those who will interest you more than any thing I can say,
  just call back to mind where you were twelve months ago. You
  remember Kenesaw Peak, and the Little Kenesaw. It is not a year
  since you stormed them, and lost my old partner and friend, Dan.
  McCook. That was on the 27th day of June, 1864. In June, 1865, you
  stand in the midst of Chicago, surrounded by bright colors and
  ladies and children. Then you were lying in the mud, the rocks and
  the dirt, and you knew there was an enemy we had to fight with and
  conquer, and we did not exactly know how to do it (laughter). But we
  were patient; we reconnoitered; we watched their flanks; we studied
  the ground, and in three days we had Johnston and his whole army,
  pinned; he retired, and we did not give him a chance of stopping
  until he had put the Chattahoochie between us and him. That is a
  lesson for you. Temporary defeat is nothing when a man is determined
  to succeed. You are not conquered, you never can be conquered when
  the mind is clear and determined in its purpose; you must succeed,
  no temporary defeat can cause failure. You all remember that on the
  fourth of July we stood close to each other, and we told them then
  that they would have to go farther than Atlanta, for we should
  continue to go on (cheers). You will remember how their pickets told
  us they had reinforcements. Yes, but what? They had one of our
  corps—Schofield's (laughter). Before General Johnston knew, or
  dreamed of it, I had reinforced his side of the Chattahoochie, by
  Gen. Schofield's 23rd corps. From this, my fellow soldiers, I want
  you to learn the lesson, no matter where you are, to-day or
  to-morrow, by keeping a purpose close in your mind, in the end you
  will succeed, whether it be in military, civil, social, or family
  affairs. Let no difficulty appal you, let no check alarm you, let
  your purpose in life be clear and steadfast, keep in view the object
  and design of your life, and just as sure as you are now before me
  in health and strength you will succeed. You are now returned to
  your homes, and the task now allotted to you is that of the future.
  The past is disposed of, it may soon be forgotten; but the future is
  before you, and that future will be more glorious than the past.
  Look at your own state of Illinois, look at the city of Chicago, it
  is hardly as old as any of you, for twenty-five years ago a little
  military garrison was here, a two company post, and now it is a city
  of palaces, of streets, rail roads, etc. You, the men of a city
  almost the second in the United States of America, are to assist in
  directing the affairs of this country. You have the patience and
  industry, and more than that, you have organization, discipline and
  drill, and if I have been instrumental in teaching you this, in
  maintaining discipline, order and good government in the army which
  I have had the honor to command, I am contented; for on this system,
  and on this high tone of honor which pervades your minds, must be
  built the empire of America (loud cheers). I did not wish to address
  you, but I believe there are no others here who desire to speak, and
  therefore I ask you to accept what is given in heartiness, a full,
  joyous welcome home to Chicago. I know it is genuine, for I myself
  have experienced it. Feel you are at home, and that there are no
  more rebels, no more raking fire, no more shot, but that you have
  done with them forever. Good morning."

At the conclusion of the speech there was loud and long continued
cheering.

Colonel Langley replied as follows:

  "I can assure you in behalf of the Illinois regiment before you,
  that your welcome, the welcome of the people of Chicago and of the
  people of the state of Illinois, is fully appreciated by these
  soldiers now returned home. They have, to some extent, known the
  good to be derived from such associations and organizations as the
  sanitary commission, and I believe that no city in the union has
  shown a deeper interest or more generous feeling toward the private
  soldier in the ranks, than has the city of Chicago. It seemed to be
  her chief purpose to secure to the soldier all those comforts so
  essential to his recovery from a bed of sickness, and from wounds
  received in battle, and the result of this kindness is that your
  offerings sent out to them have always been duly appreciated, and
  the heart has swelled with gratitude toward the kind and loyal
  people who have remembered the soldier in his distress. It ill
  befits me, who has been in the field for the last three years, to
  make a speech, but in a blunt soldier way will speak of these brave
  boys. This regiment now before you I have had the honor to command.
  I have known the men composing it for a long time; they are the
  sterling men of the country. My long acquaintance with them enables
  me to say, that never were there braver soldiers sent into battle
  against the enemy (cheers). Out of four Illinois regiments in the
  3rd brigade, 2nd division, 14th army corps, they were one. They were
  engaged first in the battle of Perryville in about three weeks after
  entering the service. Then in the battle of Chickamauga; against
  Mission Ridge, and again in the different skirmishes near Buzzard's
  Roost Gap. And on the 27th of June, 1864, the time to which General
  Sherman alluded, they made a deadly and fearful assault against the
  enemy's works on Kenesaw Mountain, and failed, but they did not turn
  their backs on the enemy and run. Instead of retreating, they took
  to their spades, and, within sixty-two feet of the enemy, threw up
  intrenchments, and from there, with their sharp-shooters, at last
  drove out the enemy. Again at Jonesboro, they assaulted the same men
  we failed to drive out at Kenesaw Mountain. They were driven out and
  captured at Jonesboro, and thus secured the capture of Atlanta. They
  have endured as much of marching, did as much campaigning, took as
  many chickens, hams, and other things, as any regiment (laughter).
  And they have been able to consume as much as any; for by casting
  your eye over them, you will see that they are men of strength and
  capable of devouring a good deal of South Carolina subsistence
  (renewed laughter). Let me assure you that these men have a home
  interest which will demand of them their earnest, sensible
  attention, of which fact they need not be advised, and when they
  return to their homes you will find many of them who did not claim
  any particular high standing in society before, will rank now above
  many who remained at home to preserve their morals (laughter). They
  will go home and return to their former avocations in life, and
  pursue them with an energy and industry proportioned to the love
  they exemplified for the country they so long, so ably and so well
  defended.

  I assure you again that the cordial and sincere welcome which you
  have tendered us, is heartily appreciated, and in behalf of the
  regiment, I thank you, and all those who have aided in the kind
  welcome extended to them."

The proceedings ended with three cheers for the regiment, and three for
General Sherman. We then marched to Bryan hall, after which we repaired
to the Soldier's Rest for dinner, and then marched back to camp
Douglass.




                             CHAPTER XXXVI.


Here we were mustered out of the service and paid off on the 30th day of
June, 1865, this we learn from our old discharge, and we also read on
that piece of imitation parchment (no objection to his being re-enlisted
is known to exist), but may the good God, who has guided us through this
struggle, who inspired our leaders, and finally gave us this victory,
grant that there may never be any more need of our services as soldiers,
unless it may be to defend the land which gave us birth, from some
foreign invader. Comrades of companies A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I and K,
fare you well, and may God bless you. We have together trod the weary
road which, with so many other boys like ourselves, has led us back at
last to home and peace. The way at times was dark and dreary, the clouds
hung low and black. We missed ever and anon from our sides the forms of
those we loved, and with whom we had held daily converse, but they are
gone, and the stately pines of the southern part of our land sing a
refrain over their graves. Some of their resting places we are ignorant
of; they died amid the fury and the smoke of battle, but thank God their
souls still live, and he who lays down his life for his friend is only
imitating the example set by the Great Master. If I have written
anything in these recollections of our army life that is in the least
hurtful to any one's feelings, if I have in any way at all harmed you,
forgive me, for such has not been my intention, and knowing me as many
of you do, I trust you will believe what I tell you about this part of
it. And now with a heartfelt desire that when your camp-fires burn low,
as God grant they never may, and your three days rations run out long
before the time, as they used sometimes to do while we were on the march
together, come over to my fire and thrust your hands into my haversack,
and if by chance it should prove to be empty, I will order out my
detail, for I have got them now, comrades, and forage for you till your
wants are all supplied. Good-by and may God bless you.

_Non nobis! Domine non nobis! sed nomine tuo da Gloriam._


                                 ROME.

Leaving the main army at Resaca our brigade moved off in the direction
of Rome, Ga., which lays on the south bank of the Coosa river. The work
on which we were ostensibly to be engaged, was the repairing of certain
railroad bridges. But whether this work was absolutely to be done, or
whether our march was but a "blind," we do not know, at any rate we took
up our line of march for that purpose, but had not begun work on the
bridges, before orders came to move with all possible speed. We reached
the city of Rome late one afternoon. The rebel army was found drawn up
in line of battle, but our fellows with cheer and shout charged their
lines, driving them across the river and out of the town. Here we went
into camp for a few days. Rome is a pretty town, and had been the center
of a good deal of business before the war, but now all was changed.
Provost guards were immediately detailed to preserve order, but in spite
of all this the boys, with the instinctive love of foraging that
animates a soldier while in the enemy's country, managed to obtain many
luxuries in the shape of tobacco, etc. We got possession of the theater,
a minstrel company was formed and several entertainments given, the
admission fee being twenty-five cents. The theater was crowded nightly,
and the entertainment was much better than we have witnessed at other
places with better facilities. The bank was also occupied, but nothing
of course was found excepting sheets of confederate money just printed,
apparently, but not signed. Some of the boys went to work filling them
out, putting down the names of "Timothy Fitzpoodelle," as president, and
"Johnny Cometalety" for cashier, or any name which would come into their
heads. These confederate bills were passed by many of our boys on the
citizens afterwards for such things as they wanted, the citizens taking
them for genuine, and indeed they were as good as any of the balance of
the confederate money. Some fellows got into the printing office, and,
being printers by trade when at home, issued a newspaper filled with
spread eagle editorials, and exhorting the editor and owner of the
property to come back to the union and give up the cause of secession.
These papers were intensely loyal, as might be supposed, and were in all
probability, as they were intended they should be, very disgusting to
the chivalry. Here also we were shown the hotel, a square, two-story
brick building, from the upper verandah of which the rebels exhibited
Mrs. Dr. Mary Walker to the shouting and yelling crowd in the street
below, whom they had captured a short time previously. But Atlanta was
the cry, and so one bright morning we left Rome with its pleasant
memories behind us.


                        A CONFEDERATE CHRISTMAS.

The following is an account of a Christmas dinner held under the rule of
the confederate government in 1861. The individual who helped to
celebrate the day, herewith gives the testimony which enables us to set
before you, what Christmas meant in those days, and what it cost:

"The dinner of 1861," he says, "did not differ materially from its
predecessors in the 'piping times of peace,' and though in 1862 the
feast was home-made, it was enjoyable. Turkeys were only eleven dollars
a piece, and salt had fallen to thirty-three cents a pound. The yule log
was attainable at fifteen dollars per cord; wines were to be had by the
very rich, and sorghum rum, or apple, peach, or black-berry brandy, cost
thirty dollars a gallon. A few toys were left in the stores in the
cities, and fire-crackers, essential to the southern festival, were five
dollars a pack. By 1863, the closest search of Santa Claus revealed no
play-things, and fire-crackers indicated great wealth, or reckless
extravagance. The few turkeys in the market were forty and fifty dollars
a piece; whisky, or sorghum rum, for egg-nog, cost seventy-five or
eighty dollars per gallon; sugar was five and ten dollars a pound, and
flour one hundred and twenty five dollars per barrel. With gold at
2,800, a plain Christmas dinner for a large family, cost two or three
hundred dollars. In 1864, when Christmas fell on Sunday, gold was at
5,000: flour was six hundred dollars per barrel; sugar, two dollars an
ounce; salt, one dollar a pound; butter, forty dollars; beef,
thirty-five to forty dollars; wood, was one hundred dollars a cord. A
Christmas dinner at a country house, near Richmond, is described thus:
The four gentleman were in uniform, the three ladies in home spun. They
had for dinner a three hundred dollar ham and the last turkey on the
plantation, valued at one hundred and seventy-five dollars, with one
hundred dollars worth of cabbage, potatoes and hominy. Corn bread was
served, made of meal at eighty dollars a bushel, and salt at one dollar
a pound. The desert was black molasses at sixty dollars a gallon, and
after a cup of tea, real tea, worth one hundred dollars a pound,
treasured up for the occasion, as a surprise, and not sassafras; there
was coffee at discretion made from sweet potatoes cut into little
squares, toasted and ground down."


                               BAD MEAT.

While in camp at Nashville, at one time, the meat issued to us was not
up to the standard, but was, on the contrary, far below it. One day
there was issued to us bacon, which was actually alive with maggots. All
of a sudden in the quarters of company I, there arose a terrible
hub-bub, men shouting and yelling, cries of "Hi, hi!" "Get out of here!"
"Go on, go on," etc., etc. We all ran down there, the colonel and all,
to see what in the world was the matter, when we found Capt. Vinson,
with his company, surrounding the pile of meat which had been issued to
them, and with their bayonets fixed were going through the motions of
driving the bacon out of camp. It was almost lively enough to march. The
colonel could not at first understand what was the matter, but soon saw
the point when he examined the meat. It was ordered to be destroyed and
better bacon was obtained.

At another time company I was called on to go with the quartermaster's
team to chop wood for camp use. Capt. Vinson refused to honor the detail
from his company, alledging that we did not come down there to chop
wood, and that there was no necessity for it any way, as there were
cords of wood, already chopped and corded up, standing outside of the
line. Quartermaster Ayers got a little riled at this, and off he went to
Colonel Harmon to report that the captain of company I refused to
furnish him a detail to chop wood. It was not long until an order came
requesting the captain's presence at regimental headquarters. Away went
the captain and reported to the colonel what he knew in regard to the
wood, for he had seen it with his own eyes. He returned to his command,
and directly the colonel, mounted on his horse, with the quartermaster
by his side, was seen riding off in the direction of the picket line.
They soon returned, and the consequence was that the teams went after
the wood without the detail. But quartermaster Ayers did not like the
refusal of the captain to go with him, and the consequence was company I
received a supply of wood that was very lasting, but of not much use for
cooking purposes, as it would not burn. Whether the quartermaster
intended it, or not, was not known, but the wood furnished company I, at
that issue, was mostly green buck eye and cottonwood.


                     PUBLIC EXECUTION AT NASHVILLE.

While we were staying at Nashville, desertions became frequent, the boys
would go off in squads. It was not the intention on the part of most of
them to remain away for good, but they longed to see home once more, and
after being absent from the command a week or two, would return. This
was contrary to all military discipline and must be stopped. Orders were
issued threatening the extreme penalty of army law, if such behavior was
continued, which was death. But still desertions were frequent; and so
one day an order was read at dress parade to the regiments of the
garrison, notifying them to be present at the execution of a soldier
belonging to the 10th Michigan, who had been tried by court martial for
desertion, found guilty, and ordered to be shot. The execution was to
take place the next day at 12 m., and all the troops in the city were to
be present. Accordingly at the appointed hour we arrived at the place
where we were drawn up into line, the flanks covered by the artillery
and cavalry. An ambulance escorted by a mounted guard, soon arrived at
the place, on the inside of which was the prisoner, and his coffin.
Disembarking, his coffin was carried before him to the spot for it to
rest. The prisoner was taken to view his grave, which had been dug at
the foot of a small bush not far off, and returning, he seated himself
on his coffin. The shooting detail marched out and took position ten
paces in front of him. The sergeant of the squad approached the prisoner
and proceeded to bandage his eyes with a handkerchief, in doing which he
was assisted by the prisoner himself. He then returned to the head of
his squad. At the word "attention, take aim," here the prisoner motioned
with his hand, pointing to his heart, "fire." The twelve rifles cracked
as one gun, the prisoner fell back across his coffin, dead. There was
not, so it seemed to us who were the unwilling spectators of the scene,
a movement of the body. Death was instantaneous, and the soul of the
soldier passed to God who gave it. It was a solemn scene, and impressed
us all deeply. But the execution was over, the regiments were marched
off to their quarters, and the affair was ended, to be talked over many
times, afterwards. We thought it horrible, but could not fail to see the
justice of it, as we all knew the penalty of desertion was death. It is
needless to add that the lesson was a salutary one, and desertions
became less frequent. Still the question arose how can the crossing of
the river be effected by any one, unless assisted by some friend outside
of our own camps. So the detective branch of the service was called
upon, and finally they unearthed the man who was causing all the
trouble. He was a doctor in the city, a rebel of the deepest dye. It
seems this fellow would make out false paroles for all who applied to
him for them, and would direct them to a certain spot on the river's
bank, where they would find a man with a boat who would ferry them
across the stream. Once over, their paroles would insure them safe
conduct, and they would proceed home at their leisure. This doctor was
arrested and confined in the penitentiary in the city, but what further
was ever done about it we never learned.


                            DRAWING RATIONS.

One evening after we had arrived in camp, while we were in Kentucky,
orders were given us to go for rations. Each company had its commissary
sergeant, whose duty it was to attend to this branch of the business. He
would call on boys enough for his purpose, and proceed to the brigade
commissary with their pots and pans, anything in fact that would hold
the supplies, and receive from him the amount of food coming to the
company, when on carrying it to the company quarters, each man would
receive the amount due him. On the evening to which we have reference,
we were called on by the sergeant to go with him for rations. Of course
we complied. Arriving at the brigade commissary's headquarters, we found
a crowd waiting there, who had come on the same errand as ourselves.
Standing close by was a large barrel filled with shoulders. It attracted
our eye immediately, for the shoulders and hams were kept for the
officers use, as it was not supposed, perhaps, that a private soldier
could eat such food. That barrel of shoulders had a mighty attraction
for us. We approached nearer to it, and finally were reclining against
it. In some way our arm and hand got inside of it, and our fingers,
those wicked fingers, quickly closed around the shank of a shoulder with
a vice-like grip, simultaneously it was drawn out, and then with a
conviction that we had better go to our quarters, we "lit out." We got
there with our shoulder safely, and crawling into our tent, were
proceeding to hide our treasure under a blanket, when a hand was laid
upon us, and a voice said, "Go halves, Bob." We nearly jumped through
the tent with surprise. We thought that we had done a very clever piece
of foraging, but our departure with the shoulder from the commissary's
had been noticed by our commissary sergeant, John Lockhart, and as John
had a tooth for such food, he had followed us up to get a share. We
divided and then returned for our rations. The next day, as we marched
along, we had a good dinner with what was left, and hoped that an
opportunity would soon offer to replenish our haversack in the same way.


                              BLUE RIDGE.

The event which we are about to relate, happened when for the first time
we were placed on picket guard, at Covington, Ky., we were stationed
three on a post, with strict orders for one at least to remain awake at
all times. The countersign that night, was "Blue Ridge," and about
nightfall we received it. One of our boys, very anxious to do his duty
properly, was on post when the "grand rounds," as it is termed, was
made; at midnight, hearing the approaching footsteps, and, perhaps,
feeling the fate of the country resting on his individual shoulders, he
halted them when they came near. "Halt," he cried, "you can't pass here
unless you say 'Blue Ridge,'" Poor Jake, that word was dinned in his
ears for many a long day after, and in fact he went by the name of "Blue
Ridge" for the balance of the time we were in the service. At daylight
we roused up, and looking off in the direction of our front, saw in the
distance a farm house; this brought to our minds visions of breakfast,
so after a short conference together, we picked up our guns and marched
off, leaving the picket post to take care of itself. We went to the farm
house and called for breakfast, which we got and paid for, and then
returned to our post. Whether our absence was ever found out or not, we
never ascertained, and in fact did not care, but it was not long before
we learned that this was not the way in which picket duty should be
performed.


                          RAIDS ON THE SUTLER.

It often happened that we ran out of money, for we would not be paid
off, perhaps, for six months at a time, and at such times we would get
in terrible straights for tobacco, and such things, and the sutler's
goods would be a terrible temptation to us. There they were, arranged in
good style back of his counter, caddies of tobacco, piles of canned
goods, candy, cheese, crackers and lots of good things. But we could not
get them, unless a particular friend of the sutler, without paying cash.
The temptation some times was too strong, and if the sutler proved to be
of a niggardly disposition, we would conspire to make a raid on his
institution. On a night agreed upon, the conspirators would assemble,
and going to the sutler's tent, each fellow would take his place at one
of the ropes by which the tent was staked to the ground, and at a given
signal, each rope that held the tent, would be cut, letting the tent
down upon its occupant, and as he was endeavoring, the best he knew how,
to get out, the boys would be making off with his goods, and then what a
feast we would have. Such affairs did not often happen, and if we did
succeed in cleaning him out, he would soon stock up again, and, perhaps,
not be so penurious with the boys in the future. But these sutlers made
enormous profits. We distinctly remember paying four dollars per plug
for navy tobacco, eight dollars for a shirt, worth perhaps, a dollar and
a half, and other things in proportion.


               JOHN KIRSCH AND TOM MAKEMSON'S RICE TRIP.

While we were lying in front of Savannah, Ga., two members of company I,
John G. Kirsch and Tom Makemson, came to the conclusion one day, as food
was scarce in camp, to go out into the country and see what success they
could have in obtaining something to eat. They procured a mule apiece
and away they went. They had not travelled far until they came to a rice
plantation, and riding up to where they saw a squad of darkies, they
opened up negotiations with them for the purchase of some rice at ten
cents per quart. The darkies were willing to sell and our warriors were
willing to buy, provided, however, that they could not obtain it by
other means. They each had a sack apiece, and soon the darkies had
filled John's sack, and he had placed it on his mule, remarking to the
colored gentleman, who had measured the rice out to him, that he would
go the picket reserve yonder, which was in plain sight, and get the
money to pay for it, and bring it back to him. Off John started. By this
time Tom had got his sack filled, and getting it on his mule, climbed up
saying: "He wondered what in the world was the reason that fellow didn't
come with that money; he was a long time sure, and he guessed he had
better go and hurry him up, when they would both return and settle." The
darkies let him go, but he had not gone far until it dawned upon their
minds "dat dem yanks aint goin' for to pay us for dat rice at all," and
immediately they started in pursuit, big, little, old and young, and
their dogs after "dem ar yanks," shouting and yelling for them to come
back and pay for "dat ar rice." They thought they could head the boys
off, but it was no use. Tom had a mule which was inclined to be balky,
but John got behind him with a stick, and by dint of beating and
shouting managed to make him go. They were making good time, with the
darkies in full pursuit, when they came to a little branch that crossed
their line of retreat. It was but a very short distance in width, and
into it they plunged, thinking it was not deep, but in this they were
badly mistaken. John's mule went under ears and all, and he gracefully
slid off and got to shore the best way he could, wet through and his bag
of rice at the bottom of the branch or bayou. Tom managed to get out all
safe and together they made their way to camp. But not a word was said.
John was shivering with the cold, his rice gone never to be recovered,
and Tom not daring to laugh for fear of his life. The darkies gave up
the chase and left the boys to make the best of their way to camp. But
the story leaked out, and they were twitted unmercifully afterwards
about their rice expedition. John was captured shortly afterwards and
taken to Andersonville, where he remained three months, but was finally
released and arrived home safe. Tom is now in Kansas.


                         MRS. DR. MARY WALKER.

While we were in camp at Lee and Gordon's mills, our camp was surprised
one day by the appearance of a person, whom, if dress was to be the
index of the sex, it would have been hard to determine whether, whoever
it might be, was male or female. But it proved to be the notorious Mrs.
Dr. Mary Walker. She had appeared at Gen. Thomas' headquarters, at
Chattanooga, desiring to be placed on duty in the front, as surgeon or
assistant surgeon. She had come from the hospitals at Washington, where
she had done good service, and where her services were acceptable. But
the doctor was ambitious; she had more of Mars than Venus in her
composition, and desired a commission with the rank of surgeon, and duty
in the field. She had been sent by General Thomas to report to Col. Dan.
McCook, our brigade commander, for duty, and here she was. Her
appearance was indeed curious, and excited not only the surprise, but
the the merriment of our boys, who, although they had seen many curious
things in their army life, had never seen the like of this before. Her
dress consisted of a low crowned fur hat, with a garment something
similar to a cloak, bound with a girdle at the waist, and reaching down
a little below the knees, from beneath which a pair of black cloth
pantaloons appeared; a small foot, covered with a neatly fitting boot,
finished up the picture. When on horseback she bestrode the animal like
a man, and unless a person knew who she was would have readily passed
for one. Her face was boyish, and so far as our judgement went, was
neither good looking or very bad. She was a lady in her deportment, but
how it ever happened that a woman should desire to occupy the position
she craved, was beyond our comprehension. To be in the midst of such
scenes as were transpiring daily, camp life, camp customs, and camp
conversation, would, we should think, have been quite contrary to the
female longings. She was very punctilious in regard to military
etiquette, however, and carried it so far that the boys got disgusted
with her. She would demand from a guard the same military treatment as
if she had been a general officer. This the boys most generally accorded
to her, more out of a spirit of politeness, than anything else. But one
day she ran across a fellow who had no polite notions in his head about
such matters, who believed only in saluting those to whom he was
compelled, by military law, to yield such homage. She had gone out to
the picket line, and had started around it, perhaps on a tour of
inspection, or, perhaps, merely for a ride. Going along the line, she
came to a man on post, who, to all indications, neither saw or heard
her, but kept on diligently walking his beat. The doctor came up and
rode by. Stopping her horse after she had passed, and riding back to the
guard, she said: "Soldier, why don't you salute me?" The guard, looking
at the doctor from head to foot, replied: "Who in h—ll are _you_?" and
immediately resumed his walk. The doctor was beaten, and so badly
beaten, both by astonishment, and, perhaps, rage, that she rode back
hastily to headquarters, as mad as a woman can ever get, to report to
Col. Dan, what she considered an outrageous insult. But Col. McCook
upheld the soldier in his military behavior, as the doctor amounted to
nothing more, in a military point of view, than any other citizen,
although deprecating his action as ungentlemanly. If there was any balm
in this for her wounded feelings, she was welcome to it; at any rate, it
was all she got. Not long after this the doctor went outside of our
lines to visit a sick woman, and while there she was captured by the
rebels. We never saw her more, and were glad to get rid of her.


                           THE "MONKLY FOX."

When in camp, or on the march, there was always some one who could
extract a laugh for the boys out of the veriest nothing, and such a
fellow was very often a regular blessing. Such a chap was Ike C——., a
quiet, unassuming fellow, broad shouldered and big fisted, and an
excellent soldier. But he had the gift of making more fun than commonly
falls to the lot of mortals. One time there had been a detail made from
the regiment, while at Nashville, to escort to Louisville a lot of rebel
prisoners. Ezra R——. was furnished from company B, and after he
returned, had marvelous tales to tell of what sights he had seen on the
road and while in Louisville. One evening he was in a tent surrounded by
a lot of boys relating to them his adventures. Ike C——. was there with
the rest. Ezra had just finished telling of some monstrosity he had seen
in Louisville, and according to his description the like had never been
heard of before. It stood up when it sat down, and had feelers like a
cat-fish on its nose. It was a marvelous creature whatever it was. Ike
listened patiently until he had got enough and went out. Just outside
the door of the tent he encountered a fellow, and the following
conversation ensued: "Say," says Ike, "you ought to go in there and just
hear Ezra R——. tell of what he saw in Louisville. It beats anything you
ever heard tell of; he says he saw something up there that sat down when
it stood up, and every time it blowed its nose it blowed cat-fish out of
it." This was all said in such a loud voice that every one inside the
tent could hear it, as it was intended they should. Out came Ezra with
the rest at his heels. "Where's that Ike?" he cried, "he just told an
awful lie about me, he said I told the boys that when I was at
Louisville, that I saw something that sat down when it stood up, and
every time it blowed its nose it blowed cat-fish out of it; I never said
it at all—." Ezra was going on to explain, but the boys could not wait
to hear, they fairly yelled and shouted with laughter. The idea of there
being such a creature, and to see Ezra get so awful mad was fun enough
for them, and it was a long time before Ezra heard the last of his trip
to Louisville. At another time, while on the march, one day Philip L——.
was relating to a comrade, as we marched along, about a great chase that
he and his brother once had at home after a fox. Phil said it was a
terrible fox, the biggest ever seen in those parts, etc., etc. Ike C——.
happened to be Phil's file leader, and a little while after Phil had
finished his story, and we were marching quietly along, nothing much
being said by any one, Ike broke out:

"Say," addressing the fellow next to him, "did you ever hear of a monkly
fox?"

"Never did," was the reply.

"Did you hear that story Phil L——. told about his brother and him
chasing a monkly fox, that had a dash-board under his tail, what a heavy
fox it was?"

The bait was grabbed by Phil.

"I never said anything about a monkly fox with a dash-board under his
tail, Ike C——., and you know it."

"Well now," says Ike, with assumed innocence, "if that don't beat all;
didn't I hear you tell about it, how you and your brother chased a
monkly fox with a dash-board under his tail, once?"

"No, you never did"

The fun for those who were listening as they marched along, was growing
fast. Still Ike held to his version of the story, with an appearance of
the greatest candor, still Philip denied, getting madder and madder, and
at last Ike capped the climax, by saying that Phil knew he did tell it,
and when they got into camp he could prove it by Lieutenant Wilson, who
was then in command of the company. All right, they would wait until
they got to camp. Accordingly that night as quick as the orders were
given to break ranks, away went Phil after the lieutenant. Says he:
"Lieutenant, did you ever hear me tell about the time that my brother
and I chased a monkly fox with a dash-board under his tail, when we were
at home?" This was too much for the lieutenant, who broke into a hearty
laugh at the absurdity of the question, and told Phil to go back to his
quarters and not come bothering him about such matters. Phil was ready
to fight almost anything but Ike C——. Ike's fists were larger than
suited Phil's requirements, but he breathed out all kinds of vengeance
against him, and the monkly fox with a dash-board under his tail was a
standing joke for a long, long time.


                              ROAST GOOSE.

One morning when in camp in Kentucky, as we were walking up the color
line, on which the guns were stacked, we saw under a stack of guns in
front of company G's quarters, a dead gander. As we passed along we
reached down and grabbing the gander round the neck, kept on. We got to
our company with our prize in safety, and hunted up the captain's
darkey, and promised him a dime and a piece of the gander, if he would
cook it for us. He accepted the proposition and took charge of the bird.
In a short time we were ordered to fall into line for company
inspection. The right of the company rested on a big pile of logs that
were making a splendid fire. As the order to "right dress" was given, we
cast our eyes to the right, and lo! and behold! there stood the
captain's darkey with our gander. Elevating him by one leg, he would
hold him over the fire until the heat would compel him to change, when
he would hold him by the other, every once in a while jerking him up,
and pinching pieces of the flesh out with his fingers, and eating it to
see if it was cooked. He had not half picked it, and the gander looked
very much as if it had received a coat of tar and feathers. At times the
darkey would get tired holding, and then he would rest himself by
placing the fearfully mistreated bird on top of his wooly pate. I kept
watching him, taking a peep at him as often as I could. At last I nudged
the fellow next to me, he looked and saw, and nudged the fellow next to
him. Then the captain, seeing that something was going wrong, happened
to turn his eyes in the same direction, also. There stood the darkey, as
black an one as ever we saw, looking reflectively into the fire, with
the mutilated gander perched on his wooly head. It was too much for the
captain, even; he smiled, and then for a moment we all laughed, but the
darkey was driven away and order restored. I never knew what became of
my gander, nor did I care, after having seen him treated in such a
manner, but if our memory serves us right, some of the boys made a raid
on the darkey after inspection was over, and captured what was left of
it.


                          THE RESCUED NEGROES.

On our march through Georgia and South Carolina, the negroes swarmed to
our lines. Here they came in all styles and conditions, some of them
presenting a pitiful sight, while the appearance of others was comical
in the extreme. Here would be a mother, bare headed, and bare footed,
her clothing in rags and tatters, carrying a babe in her arms, while two
others were clinging to her dress, doing all they could to keep up with
her. Here would be two, a man and a woman, probably his wife, in "ole
massa's" carriage, dressed up in "ole massa's and misses'" clothes that
had been left behind when "massa and misses" fled before the approach of
our army. Hitched to this buggy or carriage would be an animal, either a
horse or a mule, such an one as would be described as an architectural
animal, with fluted sides, and a hand rail down its back. But what cared
Pomp and Dinah for the appearance of the stud as long as he would bear
them on to liberty? There they would sit, laughing and chatting
together, dressed in finer clothes than they had ever before worn, as
happy as happy could be, keeping up with us while on the march, and
going into camp when we camped at night. Many of these negroes were put
to serviceable uses as pioneers, others as cooks, etc., but employment
could not be furnished for the half of them, and they were getting to be
an incubus to the army. On our line of march we often had to cross
bayous of great depth and considerable width. When we arrived at such
places, the pontoon train would be ordered up and a bridge thrown
across, over which the army marched. Gen. J. C. Davis, our corps
commander, thought that by stopping the negroes as they came to the
banks of the bayou, and holding them there until the army had crossed,
and the pontoons had been taken up, they could be kept back.

So orders to that effect were issued. A guard under command of Major
Lee, the provost general of the corps, was stationed on the bank of a
bayou and every negro, unless an officer's servant, or in charge of a
pack mule, was halted and held there until the rear guard of the corps
had crossed, then the pontoons were taken up, and the darkies left
behind. It seemed to be a cruel order, but it was necessary, for our
rear was very generally followed at a safe distance, however, by roaming
bands of guerillas and bushwhackers, and it is to be feared that their
usage of these unfortunate creatures, whenever they fell into their
hands, was cruel in the extreme, and they themselves dreaded falling
into the hands of their old oppressors. The consequence was that the
next day the darkies again made their appearance, seemingly stronger
than before as to numbers. How they managed to cross the bayou, infested
as these bayous were with alligators, we do not know, but cross they
did, and again took up their line of march with us as before. They had
outwitted the general and were bothered no more in their endeavors to
obtain freedom from persecution and oppression.


                           PERSONAL MENTION.

In giving the reader some instances of special acts of heroism, the
writer has not the slightest wish or disposition, far from it, to
unjustly discriminate against the same meritorious qualities displayed
by others. On the contrary, he would be only too glad to make particular
mention of all such, even at the risk of swelling this book beyond its
intended proportions, but unfortunately for him, the writer is not
informed of all such acts, nor the peculiar circumstances under which
they were made manifest. All who did their duty, were necessarily brave
and true. Those who did grandly under extraordinary circumstances, were
possibly no better soldiers, but were in condition to more brilliantly
display these qualities; and as their connection with the regiment gave
them their opportunity, so should their deeds become the property of the
regiment, and their memory our common heritage.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]


                       LIEUTENANT GEORGE SCROGGS.

Lieutenant George Scroggs was a young officer of more than ordinary
intelligence; quick to apprehend duty, and bold in the execution of
commands. We first remember him as our sergeant major, and how he used
to rattle the boys out of their blankets, long before daylight, during
the cold season when we occupied the suburbs of Nashville. Afterwards he
was commissioned as lieutenant of company E, then detailed on the
division staff, first as ordnance officer, and then commissary of
musters. Time, experience, and natural aptitude, served to teach him
what the duties of a staff officer should be, until, perhaps, no officer
on the staff of the division general, understood them better. All who
were engaged in it, will remember the battle of Bentonville, N. C., on
March 19th, 1865. How the third brigade was sent from its intrenchments
by General Morgan, and thrown out towards the Goldsboro road, to
intercept the rebel column then in hot pursuit of Gen. Carlin's
retreating forces. How the right wing of the brigade was struck, and
doubled back on the center and left, and finally retreated to the
batteries beyond the open field. How, too, we soon rallied and
reoccupied the lost ground, each man carrying a rail, and began the work
of intrenching. How communication with General Morgan, and the first and
second brigades was cut off, leaving Lieut. Scroggs and Captain Stinson,
of Gen. Morgan's staff, with our brigade, unable to reach their command.
In this dilemma, instead of seeking a safe retreat as they might, and
too many would have done, until communication was opened with their own
general, they at once reported to Col. Langley for duty as volunteer
aids. You will also remember the fact that constant firing, threatened
every minute, our stock of ammunition, and the equally constant firing
of the enemy, made a passage to our supplies across the open field to
our rear, exceedingly hazardous. The colonel had already ordered two or
three staff officers, and as many orderlies, beyond the hill for
ammunition, but with no good result, though reports came back to him
that it had been ordered, and the wagons were on the way. Shortly an
orderly reported that two wagons were just over the crest of the ridge,
but were afraid to go further, and had refused to do so. The colonel
immediately dispatched Lieut. Scroggs to proceed and bring these two
wagons at all hazards. The moment he received the order, he sank his
spurs into his horse, and dashed across the field towards where the
insubordinate drivers were supposed to be, through a perfect storm of
bullets and exploding shells, until he disappeared from view beyond.
Every heart at the front beat with intense anxiety. We had already been
ordered to economize our supply. Some were entirely out of cartridges
and were borrowing from others. A few rounds to the man had been
obtained from a brigade of the 20th army corps, and these were nearly
all gone. Our position became critical, but in a few moments, looking
again to the rear, we saw the brave lieutenant returning at the same
speed with which he had left us and with him were the wagons and
ammunition so much desired, and looked for by all, moving to the
threatening motion of George's sword. They were just in time, for our
firing could have continued but little longer, and they were welcome in
proportion to our danger. George had found the wagons as he expected,
and immediately ordered the teamsters to mount and follow him, but their
fear still deterred them, and they refused, and only obeyed the commands
when he drew his sword, and in language more forcible than elegant,
threatened them with vengeance more terrible than rebel bullets had
power to inflict. Towards sundown the lieutenant was severely wounded in
a further attempt to reach his commanding officer. This afflicted him
more or less during the remainder of his days. Precisely how far he was
instrumental in saving the honor of the brigade, and the lives of many
of the members by his timely execution of so important an order on that
bloody 19th of March, may never be known, but the memory of a brave act,
voluntarily performed in the face of grave danger, merits our highest
commendation, and we cheerfully place this tribute of respect upon the
recently made grave of Lieutenant George Scroggs.


                         SERGEANT S. C. ABBOTT.

Numbers of our readers will remember Sergeant S. C. Abbott, of company
H. Always in earnest about everything he undertook, impatient of delay,
anxious to end the job and go home about his business, which greatly
needed his attention. He was perhaps older than the average of the
regiment, a very intelligent man, and had preached to some extent before
entering the service. Some time in the fall of 1863, he applied for a
furlough, urging business considerations, but after a good deal of
delay, his application was returned—"denied." He received the
information just as the regiment was on the march to a new camp, the
route to which, took us nearly by General Thomas' headquarters at
Chattanooga. The sergeant, vexed at the delay, and mortified at the
refusal of his request, concluded to cut all red tape, and go in person
to General Thomas with his application. He accordingly broke ranks, went
alone to the house the general was occupying, passed by every sentinel,
and burst into the august presence of the great army chief. Holding his
returned application for a furlough in his hand, his whole manner
evincing the desperation of his purpose, he thrust the offending
endorsement under the very nose of the commander of the armies, and
demanded, as one having authority, to know what the language meant, and
why his application was refused. He was referred to the proper officer
for explanation, but he would accept no reference, and in an impassioned
appeal to grant the favor he asked, he struck the tender side of the
good old general's nature, who at once, with his own hand, we believe,
erased the offensive word, "denied," and wrote thereon, "granted;" and
the over rejoiced sergeant was soon homeward bound, filled with thoughts
of love for good old "Pap" Thomas. This was not our purpose, however, in
introducing Sergeant Abbott to your notice. The above may be called an
act of boldness, "cheek," "strategy," or what you will, but surely there
were few men who would have taken the risk. We remember this daring
soldier on other occasions. At the close of the battle of Missionary
Ridge, and while we were pursuing General Manny's brigade of rebels
across a small, boggy stream, just about dark, to our front and left
were standing some ammunition wagons, abandoned by the enemy. They were
necessarily in the line of our march, but as we approached them, one of
the wagons was discovered to be on fire, and nearly full of fixed
ammunition, not yet removed from the boxes. The regiment immediately
swung to the right, to avoid so dangerous an enemy. Some one had the
presence of mind to call for volunteers to help extinguish the fire
before it should communicate to the powder, and produce the explosion
that would have been inevitable, and possibly disastrous to human life.
All shrunk involuntarily from the task, but the sergeant, well toward
the right of the regiment, and in comparative security, at once ran down
to the left, and promptly answering, "I will go," suited his action to
the word, and in a moment was fighting down and conquering the fire with
no more concern, or trepidation, than if he was adjusting it for cooking
his rations. His act was justly applauded by all who witnessed it. It is
a pity so brave a man should go through life maimed as he is, but he met
the common fate of the soldier, and was severely wounded July 20th,
1864, at Peach Tree creek, and will probably carry the missile intended
for his death, in his body so long as he lives. On the morning after
that battle, the sergeant had gone a little to the front, to spy out
where some rebel sharp-shooters lay concealed, and were firing upon our
men. He succeeded in locating them, and was in the act of pointing out
their position to Colonel Langley, when he was wounded. This was the
last service he did with the regiment, as the severity of his wound
necessitated his discharge, and he left us regretted by all his comrades
who had learned his sterling qualities.


                       LIEUTENANT JOHN J. WHITE.

We want to give a slight tribute to the memory of a very brave young
officer of company F, Lieut. John J. White.

This young man had enlisted in his company as a private. He was young,
intelligent, a stranger to the company at its organization, but his
soldierly bearing, intelligent comprehension of duty, and its prompt
performance, soon attracted attention to him as comprising the material
suited for a leader, and he was promoted to a lieutenancy. At the
crossing of the Sand Town road in front of Atlanta, August 7, 1864, the
lieutenant was in command of company G, under temporary detail for that
purpose. The short advance made by our line at that place, was
accomplished in the face of a galling fire of musketry and artillery,
not less than half a dozen batteries of the enemy, centering their fire
upon our exposed ranks. Men were falling in every direction and the
scene was for a time simply terrific. Our position once reached, the men
were ordered to lie down. The confusion of getting into position doubled
the line in some parts and left gaps in others. Lieutenant White was
actively endeavoring to get the left to give way so as to let all of
company G into line, and in meeting with opposition he stepped a few
paces to the right to inform the colonel of the situation, and was just
in the act of saluting him with his sword, when a shell from the enemy
crashed through his right shoulder, tearing the arm from his body, from
which wound he died in a few hours. Amid the storm of battle, when brave
men expose themselves only from necessity, that coolness and mental
collection that enables an officer to remember all the refinements of
discipline, even to the salutation of his superior, is a quality to be
admired, as it evinces a talent so essential to command under the most
trying circumstances. Lieutenant White was of a modest and retiring
disposition, ordinarily, but in action was the impersonation of true
courage. He was beloved by all who shared his more intimate fellowship,
and his death cast a gloom over the regiment. May peace forever brood
over the land that holds the remains of the brave soldier.


                           OUR COLOR BEARERS.

Who but brave men would solicit the honor of carrying the colors, or who
of any other quality would not murmur if ordered to that post of great
responsibility and danger? Yet who ever heard a word of complaint from
James H. Simpson or James M. White? Whether in the bright sunshine or
under the storm cloud, in camp or on the weary march, on the defence, or
in the deadly assault, on through to victory or defeat, they never
swerved or faltered, but always stood true to their great trust, until
the last hostile gun was fired, and these brave boys returned their
battle and storm scarred emblems to the government they had so nobly
served. How in the desolation of the conflict, the right and left
flanks, when the burden of the fight seemed to be almost an individual
one, would cast their eyes towards the center, and learning that "our
flag was still there," caught a new inspiration and redoubled their
energies for the victory. And now as we reflect that our nation's banner
waves triumphantly over all this broad land, the emblem of peace and
law, and as our hearts swell with gratitude and just pride over this
grand consummation, let us not forget the honor due the men whose
heroism during the perils of war kept _our_ flag from the pollution of
traitor hands.


                           ASBURY D. FINLEY.

It would not do to forget in this connection the name of Asbury D.
Finley, private of company A. No truer heroism was ever displayed than
by this young man on the Peach Tree creek battle-field. The 85th
Illinois, commanded by Major Rider, was sent forward across a narrow
corn-field and into position, as ordered by Col. Dilworth, then
commanding the brigade. Our regiment was ordered to advance to near the
edge of the corn-field and support the 85th, and although only a short
distance apart, we could not see the 85th for the standing corn. We had
remained in this position for some time, when it became apparent that
the rebels were on the ground formerly occupied by the 85th, though we
had received no notice of the removal of the latter regiment. In this
state of doubt, and to make sure of the situation, Col. Langley called
for a volunteer to go forward, learn and report the condition of things
to the front. It was a task that even brave men would not covet, but at
once Finley rose and offered to go. Receiving his instructions he
started through the corn-field. But the result and the colonel's
appreciation of the act, and his impressions after the lapse of more
than sixteen years, we will give in his own words taken from a personal
letter to Mr. Finley of date February 14th, 1881:

                               CHAMPAIGN, ILLINOIS, FEBRUARY 14, 1881.

  A. D. FINLEY, ESQ., Catlin, Illinois.

  _My dear sir and comrade_: * * * * I well remember and can not
  forget how on the 19th day of July, 1864, at Peach Tree creek, when
  I was anxious to know whether the 85th Illinois was still in our
  front beyond, and I called for a volunteer to go forward, ascertain
  and report, that you very promptly offered to go, and did go, until
  you were captured almost in my sight. I remember that you were
  detained for a long time a prisoner and that when you returned to
  the regiment you were very much emaciated. That I believed then and
  still believe you had suffered during your incarceration, all the
  torments of Andersonville. I also remember how grateful I was for
  the services you so bravely rendered to the whole regiment, and
  possibly the brigade, for your capture showed me that the rebels
  were occupying the very ground I had reason to suppose was covered
  by the 85th Illinois, and enabled me to adjust my line for greater
  security until ordered to retire by the brigade commander. I could
  say very much more, if necessary, as reasons satisfactory to me, why
  your case should be regarded with great favor by the government you
  aided so much to defend and save.

                                           Very truly,
                                                        J. W. LANGLEY.

The above letter was written in support of an application for a pension,
because of disability incurred while Finley was a prisoner at
Andersonville.


                            HARVEY S. TRYON.

Another instance of true courage and manhood was exemplified in the
military life and character of Harvey S. Tryon, for a long time a
private of company H, but when mustered out, a sergeant. We do not
remember this man as specially brilliant in feats of arms, or in the
performance of some peculiarly delicate or dangerous military duty, but
still a _hero_ in the highest sense, and his memory will be respected as
such by all christian men and women who knew him, or shall read this
estimate of his christian character. It may be said of him, as probably
of very few, if any, others, that during his entire three years service,
performing at all times every military duty required of him, amid the
levity, and too often vulgar profanity of the camp, he never omitted his
higher duty to the God of his salvation, whom he had vowed to serve. His
faith was simple, pure, and firmly grounded. His religious convictions
were never compromised or suffered to lie in abeyance, but without
ostentation, or self-righteous display, he moved in the midst of his
comrades their best friend and safe counsellor, and a daily example of a
true life. He had the respect of all who knew him, and his pious
influence was reflected upon all who came in contact with him. Since the
war he has been continuously preaching the gospel truths he so happily
illustrated in his life and character while a soldier. Heroism in this
line being so rare in army life, we cannot refrain from saying this much
of one who so fully exemplified it in our regiment.


                        SERGEANT WM. L. THRALLS.

Another brave boy was Sergeant William L. Thralls, of company B. We say
boy, for he was only that in years, yet he was endowed with all the
qualities of a grand manhood. In camp, and at all times, a gentleman in
his deportment; in action, brave, cool, and intelligent. He had
attracted the attention of his superior officers, and was to have been
recommended for a lieutenancy. In the first onset at the battle of
Jonesboro, he was wounded in the leg, and in endeavoring to leave the
field, was offered assistance by his comrades, but this he refused,
telling them to stick to their guns, as he would not let them leave the
field on his account. This circumstance happened under the eye of
Colonel Langley, who there and then commended him for his bravery, and
offered to send one of the musicians with him, but no he would not
accept, refusing with the inborn politeness of a natural gentleman. The
colonel pointed him where our hospital was, and the brave young sergeant
dragged himself off the field. When nearly at the hospital he received a
mortal wound through the body, of which he shortly died. We will give,
in the colonel's own language, his last sad interview with our brave
young comrade. He says:

  "After night, and when I had reported my position to General Morgan,
  I went to look up Thralls, for his coolness impressed me all through
  the fight. On finding him I learned that after nearly reaching the
  hospital, he had received another wound through the body, of which
  he must shortly die. I was shocked to hear it for I greatly wanted
  that boy to recover, so that I could give him the promotion I
  intended for him, and he so well deserved. I bent over his dying
  form, gently touching him, and spoke his name. Upon recognizing me
  he roused a little and expressed much delight that I had come to see
  him. He first asked me how the battle had gone, and upon being told,
  he seemed greatly gratified. He begged to be assured that I was
  entirely satisfied with his conduct, and upon being told that he was
  the first man that I had ever seen who refused help from the field,
  and that such denial evinced a discipline so unusual, and a spirit
  so unselfish, as to make his conduct specially commendable, and that
  as a true soldier he had done his whole duty. He seemed content, was
  willing to die for his country, and be at rest, for he was suffering
  most intense pain. With a sad heart I bade that boy farewell."

Yes, poor fellow, he was loved by us all, and we deeply mourned his
death. It is such men as these whose company is an honor to the living,
and over whose memory we meditate with saddened thoughts. But to that
galaxy of bright names on high, to which so many names were added during
our terrible war, we feel assured that the name of William L. Thralls,
is also there, shining with the effulgence of glory. Brave soldier, true
comrade, faithful friend, farewell. The pines of Georgia wail a mournful
requiem over your last resting place, but your better part has gone to
God who gave it; this is the assurance that the bible gives, and we
believe it. Suffice it to say, that no braver name appears on the muster
roll of company B, than Sergeant William L. Thralls, and what more
glorious epitaph than that which comes after: "Died of wounds received
at Jonesboro, Ga., September 2, 1864."


                     THE EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION.

As we have before stated, we were garrisoning the city of Nashville when
we received the Emancipation Proclamation, and during the one hundred
days that ensued between its publication and enforcement, there was
considerable stir in army circles as to the propriety and legality of
such a measure. In our own regiment the officers held a meeting for the
purpose, as it were, of ratifying the Proclamation, at which the
following resolutions, by Colonel Langley, were spread before the
meeting for its approval and adoption:

  _Resolved_, That we are as ready and willing to aid the Commander in
  Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, in carrying out his
  proclamation to emancipate the slaves in certain territory therein
  mentioned, as a necessary war measure, as we are to aid in the
  execution of any order from the War Department.

  _Resolved_, That he who fails to see written in unmistakable
  characters, the doom of slavery as a consequence of the war, must be
  totally blind to the great panorama of events which daily pass
  before him, and he who would avoid confusion and anarchy, must also
  see the necessity of organizing and disciplining slaves, made free
  by military authority; and further, if organized and disciplined,
  the great error we commit as a nation, by not employing such
  persons, so made free, to the most advantageous purposes in crushing
  out the present rebellion, even if it be to arm and fight them
  against the rebellious hosts that oppose us.

But these resolutions seemed too radical, and many opposed them
strongly. However before three months rolled around, the very men who
were the bitterest and loudest in their denunciation of them, at the
time, were seeking for commissions in colored regiments. The resolutions
pointed out, with true prophetic utterance, the course which the
government pursued in regard to the slaves, but at the time they looked
to some as being altogether wrong. _Tempora et mores mutantur._


                RESOLUTION PASSED BY SENATE AND HOUSE OF
                      REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STATE
                             OF LOUISIANA.

                             Headquarters Military Division of the Miss.
                                        Goldsboro, N. C., April 7, 1865.

 _Special Field Order._ }
       _No. 49._        }      EXTRACT.

The general in chief announces for the information of this army the
following resolutions received:

WHEREAS, The official announcement of the fall of Charleston, the
"cradle of secession," has been received, therefore, be it

_Resolved_ by the senate and house of representatives of the state of
Louisiana in general assembly convened, that we tender our most hearty
thanks to the gallant officers and men of the army of the illustrious
Sherman, who under God have been the instruments of the accomplishment
of so glorious an achievement. Be it further

_Resolved_, That in the late glorious victory of Gen. Sherman, we
recognize the hand of God, as directing the affairs of our country, and
as an evidence of the speedy return of peace.

                        [SIGNED.] SIMON BELDON,
                            Speaker of the House of Representatives.

                                [SIGNED.] J. MADISON WELLS,
                                      Lt. Gov. and Prest. of the Senate.

                                             Approved March 3rd, 1865.

  By order of Major General W. T. Sherman.

                       [SIGNED.] L. M. DAYTON, A. A. G.


              ORDER RETURNING THE THANKS OF THE PRESIDENT
                     TO GEN. SHERMAN AND THE ARMY.

             Headquarters 14th Army Corps, Department of the Cumberland,
                                 Near Jonesboro, Ga., Sept. 6th, 1864.

  ORDERS.—The general commanding directs that the following order be
  published to all the troops composing the army of the Cumberland.

                             Headquarters Military Division of the Miss.
                      In the field near Jonesboro, Ga., Sept. 6th, 1864.

 _Special Field Order._ }
       _No. 66._        }

I. The general in chief communicates with a feeling of just pride and
satisfaction the following orders of the president of the United States,
and telegram of Lieut. Gen. U. S. Grant, on the hearing of the capture
of Atlanta.

      1st. Executive Mansion, Washington, D. C., Sept. 3rd, 1864.

The national thanks are rendered by the president to Major General W. T.
Sherman and the gallant officers and soldiers of his command before
Atlanta, for the distinguished ability, courage and perseverance
displayed in the campaign in Georgia, which, under the divine favor, has
resulted in the capture of the city of Atlanta. The marches, battles,
sieges and other military operations that have signalized the campaign
must render it famous in the annals of war, and have entitled those who
have participated therein to the applause and thanks of the nation.

                                            [SIGNED.] ABRAHAM LINCOLN,
                                                         President U. S.

       2nd. Executive Mansion, Washington City, Sept. 3rd, 1864.

ORDERED: _First._ That on Monday the 5th day of September, commencing at
the hour of twelve o'clock m., there shall be given a salute of one
hundred (100) guns at the arsenals and navy yards at Washington, and on
Tuesday the 6th day of September, the day after the receipt of this
order at each arsenal and navy yard in the United States for the recent
brilliant achievements of the fleet and land forces of the United States
in the harbor of Mobile, and in the reduction of Fort Powell, Fort
Gaines and Fort Morgan. The secretary of war and secretary of navy will
issue the necessary orders in their respective departments for the
execution of this order.

_Second._ That on Wednesday, the seventh day of September, commencing at
the hour of twelve o'clock m., there shall be a final salute of one
hundred (100) guns at the arsenal at Washington and at New York, Boston,
Philadelphia, Baltimore, Pittsburg, Newport, Ky.; St. Louis, New
Orleans, Mobile, Pensacola, Hilton Head and Newbern, or on the day after
the receipt of this order, for the brilliant achievements of the army
under command of Major General Sherman in the state of Georgia and the
capture of Atlanta. The Secretary of war will issue directions for the
execution of this order.

                                            [SIGNED.] ABRAHAM LINCOLN,
                                                         President U. S.

            3rd. City Point, Va., Sept. 4th, 9 p. m., 1864.

MAJOR GENERAL SHERMAN: I have just received your dispatch announcing the
capture of Atlanta. In honor of your great victory I have ordered a
salute to be fired with shotted guns from every battery bearing upon the
enemy. The salute will be fired within an hour amid great rejoicing.

                                               [SIGNED.] U. S. GRANT,
                                                     Lieutenant General.

II. All the corps, regiments and batteries composing this army may,
without further orders, inscribe "Atlanta" on their colors.

By order of Major General W. T. Sherman.

                                             [SIGNED.] L. M. DAYTON,
                                                            Aid-de-camp.


              ORDER ANNOUNCING SUSPENSION OF HOSTILITIES.

                Headquarters Military Division of the Mississippi,
                         Army of Georgia, Raleigh, N. C, April 27, 1865.

 _Special Field Order._ }
       _No. 65._        }

The General commanding announces a further suspension of hostilities,
and a final agreement with General Johnston which terminates the war as
to the armies under his command, and the country east of the
Chattahoochie. Copies of the terms of the convention will be furnished
Maj. Gens. Schofield, Gilmore and Wilson, who are especially charged
with the execution of its details in the Department of N. C., Department
of the South, and at Macon and Western Georgia. Captain Jasper Mayres,
Ordnance Department, U. S. A., is hereby designated to receive the arms,
etc., at Greensboro, and any commanding officer of any post may receive
the arms of any detachment, and see that they are properly stored and
accounted for. General Schofield will procure the necessary blanks and
supply the other army commanders, that uniformity may prevail, and great
care must be taken that all the terms and stipulations on our part be
fulfilled with the most scrupulous fidelity; while those imposed on our
hitherto enemies, be received in a spirit becoming a brave and generous
army. Army commanders may at once leave to the inhabitants such of the
captured mules, horses, wagons and vehicles as can be spared from
immediate use, and the commanding general of armies may issue
provisions, animals, or any public property that can be spared to
relieve present wants, and to encourage the inhabitants to resume their
peaceful pursuits, and to restore the relation of friendship among our
fellow citizens and countrymen.

Foraging will forthwith cease, and when necessity for long marches
compels the taking of forage, provisions, or any kind of public
property, compensation will be made on the spot, or when the disbursing
officers are not provided with funds, vouchers will be given in proper
form, payable at the nearest military depot.

                                         By order of
                                             Maj. Gen. W. T. Sherman.
                                               (Signed) L. M. Dayton,
                                                        Asst. Adjt. Gen.


              ORDER FOR THE GRAND REVIEW AT RICHMOND, VA.

                        Headquarters 14th Army Corps, Army of Georgia,
                                           Manchester, Va., May 8, 1865.

     _Special Field     }
        Orders._

       _No. 41._        }

Division commanders will, if possible, obtain all necessary supplies,
and move their supply trains through Richmond to-morrow, and park them
in the vicinity of Hanover Court House, to-morrow night.

On the following day, May 10th, the Army of Georgia will march through
the streets of Richmond in review before Maj. Gen. H. W. Halleck,
commanding the military division of the James, the 14th army corps in
advance. The column entirely unincumbered with wagons, will be formed as
follows: 3rd division, Brevet Maj. Gen. Baird commanding. 2nd division,
Brevet Maj. Gen. Morgan. 1st division, Brigadier Gen. Walcott. The head
of the column will be at the pontoon bridge and ready to move at 7:30 a.
m. The column will cross the upper pontoon bridge, move up 17th street
to Cary street, down Cary to 21st street, up 21st to Main street, up
Main to 13th street, up 13th to Capitol street, through Capitol to Grace
st., up Grace street to Adams street, and thence to Brooks avenue.

The troops will be reviewed with knapsacks, and will carry at least one
day's rations in their haversacks. The troops, marching at right
shoulder shift, will come to a shoulder arms before passing the Statue
of Washington, near the capitol, and will continue the shoulder until
passing the reviewing officer, who will be near the same point. Upon
passing all troops under arms, or general officers, the usual compliment
of coming to a shoulder will be paid. When the width of the street will
permit, the troops will march in column of companies. Neither band nor
field musicians will turn out before the reviewing officer.

After passing through the city, the troops will encamp the same night in
the vicinity of Hanover Court House. All pack mules, wagons and
ambulances, not sent through the city before the 10th instant, will be
massed near the bridge, and will, under the supervision of the chief
quarter master of the corps, cross the lower pontoon bridge at the same
time the troops are passing on the upper bridge, move down Water street,
to 22nd street, up 22nd to Franklin street, up Franklin street to 19th
street, up 19th to Mechanicsville turnpike, from which road they will
join their commands without interfering with the march of the troops.

                             By order of
                                 Brevet Maj. Gen. J. C. Davis.
                                        (Signed) A. C. McClurg,
                                         Lieut. Col. and Chief of Staff.


                GENERAL SHERMAN'S FAREWELL ORDER TO HIS
                                 ARMY.

                      Headquarters Military Division of the Mississippi.
                         In the field, Washington, D. C, May 30th, 1865.

 _Special Field Order._ }
       _No. 76._        }

The general commanding announces to the armies of the Tennessee and
Georgia, that the time has come for us to part. Our work is done and
armed enemies no longer defy us. Some of you will be retained in service
until further orders. And now that we are about to separate to mingle
with the civil world, it becomes a pleasing duty to recall to mind the
situation of national affairs, when but little more than a year ago we
were gathered about the towering cliffs of Lookout mountain, and all the
future was wrapped in doubt and uncertainty. Three armies had come
together from distant fields, with separate histories, yet bound by one
common cause, the union of our country, and the perpetuation of the
government of our inheritance. There is no need to recall to your
memories Tunnel Hill, with Rocky Face mountain, and Buzzard Roost Gap,
with the ugly forts of Dalton behind. We were in earnest and paused not
for danger and difficulty, but dashed through Snake Creek Gap and fell
on Resaca, then on to the Etowah, to Dallas, Kenesaw, and the heats of
summer found us on the banks of the Chattahoochie, far from home and
dependent on a single road for supplies. Again we were not to be held
back by any obstacle, and crossed over and fought four heavy battles for
the possession of the citadel of Atlanta. That was the crisis of our
history. A doubt still clouded our future, but we solved the problem,
and destroyed Atlanta, struck boldly across the state of Georgia,
severed all the main arteries of life to our enemy, and Christmas found
us at Savannah. Waiting there only long enough to fill our wagons, we
again began a march which for peril, labor and results, will compare
with any ever made by an organized army. The floods of the Savannah, the
swamps of the Combahee and Edisto, the high hills and rocks of the
Santee, the flat quagmires of the Pedee and Cape Fear rivers were all
passed in midwinter, with its floods and rains in the face of an
accumulating enemy, and after the battles of Averysboro and Bentonville,
we once more came out of the wilderness to meet our friends at
Goldsboro. Even there we paused only long enough to get our clothing, to
reload our wagons, and again pushed on to Raleigh and beyond, until we
met our enemy suing for peace instead of war, and offering to submit to
the enjoined laws of his and our country. As long as that enemy was
defiant, nor mountains, nor rivers, nor swamps, nor hunger, nor cold had
checked us, but when he who had fought us hard and persistently offered
submission, your general thought it wrong to pursue him farther, and
negotiations followed which resulted as you all know in his surrender.
How the operations of this army have contributed to the final overthrow
of the confederacy and the peace which now dawns on us, must be judged
by others, not by us, but that you have done all that men could do, has
been admitted by those in authority, and we have a right to join in the
universal joy that fills our land because the war is over, and our
government stands vindicated before the world by the just action of the
"volunteer armies of the United States."

To such as remain in the military service, your general need only remind
you that success in the past was due to hard work and discipline, and
that the same work and discipline are equally important in the future.
To such as go home, he will only say that our favored country is so
grand, so extensive, so diversified in climate, soil and productions,
that every man may find a home and occupation suited to his taste, and
none should yield to the natural impatience sure to result from our past
life of excitement and adventure. You will be invited to seek new
adventures abroad, but do not yield to the temptation, for it will lead
only to death and disappointment. Your general now bids you all farewell
with the full belief that as in war you have been good soldiers, so in
peace you will make good citizens, and if, unfortunately, new war should
arise in our country, "Sherman's army" will be the first to buckle on
its old armor and come forth to defend and maintain the government of
our inheritance and choice.

                                  By order of
                                       Maj. Gen. W. T. Sherman.
                                            (Signed.) L. M. Dayton,
                                                      Asst. Adjt. Gen'l.


                 REGIMENTAL REPORT OF ATLANTA CAMPAIGN.

                               Headquarters 125th Regt. Ills. Vols.,
                                          Atlanta, Ga., Sept. 7th, 1864.

SIR: In compliance with orders I have the honor to submit the following
report of the part taken by this command in the recent campaign, from
its commencement in May, until its arrival at Atlanta on the 4th
instant.

In order for me to make this report nearly accurate, I must depend
mainly upon the notes of Col. O. F. Harmon and Lieut. Col. James W.
Langley, respectively, commanders of the regiment from the commencement
of the campaign until the first day of the present month, when the
command fell to me.

Forming a part of the 3rd brigade, 2nd division, 14th army corps, this
regiment, commanded by Col. O. F. Harmon, numbering four hundred and
forty-nine effective men, left Lee and Gordon's mills, Ga., on the 3rd
day of May last, where it had being doing, in connection with the
brigade commanded by Col. Danl. McCook, out-post duty, and marched to
Ringgold, where it joined the division commanded by Brig. Gen. Jeff. C.
Davis. After a day or two of rest at the last named place, the forward
march was resumed and continued until we faced the enemy before Buzzard
Roost Gap, on the road to this point, skirmishing with the retreating
foe at different points, and at Buzzard Roost we were most of the time,
during several days, actively engaged with the enemy's skirmishers, but
lost no men. The regiment participated in the flank movement through
Snake Creek Gap, which move gained Buzzard Roost. This march was long
and tedious, but was borne by all cheerfully and without complaint. At
Resaca we met the enemy and were engaged actively with him. The regiment
occupied a temporary line of works immediately in front of, and but a
few hundred yards from, the works of the opposing forces. Here, as in
previous instances, every man did his duty, until the flight of the
enemy from Resaca, on the night of the 14th of May, opened the following
morning a new field of labor. An expedition to Rome, Ga., was fitted out
for our division, and on the morning of the 15th, the regiment was
detailed with one section of battery I, 2nd Ills. Arty., to command and
guard the division supply and ordnance train in rear of the marching
column of the division to that city. The regiment took no part in the
fight at Rome on the 17th; arrived with its important charge on the
following day; remained at Rome doing various duty until the 24th day of
May, when the entire division took up its line of march towards Dallas.
Joined the army of the Tennessee, to which the division was temporarily
attached, near the last named place, on the 26th day of May. The next
encounter with the enemy, was at Dallas, on the night of the 27th of
May, when we were attacked by a superior force while engaged in
relieving the 22nd Ind., who were doing picket duty. The enemy succeeded
in capturing, owing to the unavoidable condition of the lines at that
moment, fourteen enlisted men, and one commissioned officer, and
wounding three others, enlisted men. But this temporary disaster was
quickly, though but partially, compensated, by the capture of one
captain, one lieutenant and twenty-five enlisted men from the enemy. On
the following morning the pickets drove the enemy back with a loss of
twenty killed and wounded, but two men wounded on our side. Until we
reached Kenesaw Mountain on the 27th of June, nothing worthy of note
occurred, although we daily faced the foe. At Kenesaw Mountain, on the
morning of the 27th of June, the regiment, in connection with the
brigade, formed part of the attacking column that was on that day hurled
against the enemy's works. The 125th regiment was the foremost in the
brigade. The conflict was short and bloody, and it is painful to record
that a repulse to our forces along the entire line, was the result.
Never fought troops better than on that day, and attention is called to
the casualties in this command alone, which were one hundred and twenty
in the short space of twenty minutes, nearly one half of which were in
the list of killed, and also that the brigade rallied within sixty yards
of the enemy's works, threw up intrenchments under a heavy fire, and
held them until the night of July 3rd, when the enemy evacuated their
lines and retreated towards Atlanta. In the above mentioned engagement
we lost several brave officers and men, chief among whom was the colonel
of the regiment, of whom it may not be inappropriate here to remark that
a braver or more efficient officer in line of his peculiar duties, the
army of the Union does not contain. The command at this point devolved
upon Lt. Col. James W. Langley, who commanded the regiment through the
engagement at the Chattahoochie river, July 5th, and at Peach Tree
creek, on the 19th of July, in both of which it was actively engaged,
and subsequently until, in the midst of the battle of Jonesboro, Sept.
1st, when Col. Dilworth, brigade commander, was wounded and carried off
the field, the command of the brigade devolved upon him (Lt. Colonel
Langley), and that of the regiment upon myself. During the whole of the
engagement at Jonesboro, the officers and men exhibited courage worthy
of the cause for which they fought. The regiment while yet under command
of Col. Langley, reached the crest of the hill just in front of the
rebel battery engaging the enemy in the open field, contributed greatly
in aiding the 2nd brigade on our left to scale the enemies' works. Here
they fought with the desperation of men determined to win, and they did
win, though not until my regiment had lost an officer and three men
killed, thirty enlisted men wounded, some six or eight of them mortally.
At dark the regiment was formed in line with the 85th, 86th and 110th
Ills., when we built a strong line of works. The troops were marched to
Jonesboro and put in temporary camp. The regiment and brigade were
ordered to Atlanta, Sept. 4th, in charge of nearly two thousand
prisoners captured in the Jonesboro fight, and went into camp at this
place, where it now remains, and it is sincerely hoped, that if the
campaign is over, it will remain until, in the opinion of the powers
that be, it is needed in the field for active operations.

                  *       *       *       *       *

I respectfully submit and herewith transmit, a list of casualties in the
command since May 3rd, up to the close of this campaign. In conclusion I
would say in behalf of the officers and enlisted men of this regiment,
that they, with few exceptions, most manfully and soldierly in every
engagement in which the regiment has participated, stood up and faced
the foe, while many fell dead on the field. It would be difficult to
make special mention of names, and do ample justice to all and injustice
to none. A grateful country will reward them all for their noble
services. The survivors of Kenesaw and subsequent battles, can never
forget our patriotic dead, Colonel Harmon, Captains Fellows and Lee, and
Lt. McClane, fell at the former place where duty called them. At Peach
Tree Creek, Lieut. Jones, of company D, commanding company B, died as he
had lived, a true christian soldier. Lieut. White, who so nobly fell at
the crossing of the Sand Town road, was loved and respected by all whose
good fortune it was to have his acquaintance. Again at Jonesboro, the
daring and faithful Captain Charles fell in the discharge of his
immediate duty. So, too, Sergeant Thralls, who for more than two months,
had commanded company B, wounded in the leg during the hottest of the
engagement, received his fatal wound from a stray bullet while his wound
was being dressed. My confidence in him as a company commander, was
always firm, because I knew him to be a brave man.

                                       Very Respectfully,
                                            Your obdt. servant.
                            (Signed.)           G. W. Cook.
                                            Captain commanding regiment.

List of casualties in the 125th regiment Illinois volunteer infantry
from May 3rd to September 6th, 1864:

May 11th, Buzzard Roost, Ga., 1 enlisted man wounded.

May 15th, Resaca, Ga., 1 enlisted man wounded.

May 31st, Dallas, Ga., 1 commissioned officer missing, 5 enlisted men
wounded, 14 missing.

June 27th, Kenesaw Mountain, Ga., 4 commissioned officers killed, 1
missing; 50 enlisted men killed, 63 wounded, 6 missing.

July 5th, Chattahoochie River, Ga., 1 commissioned officer wounded.

July 19th, Peach Tree Creek, 1 commissioned officer killed, 1 enlisted
man killed, 3 wounded, 1 missing.

August 5th to 12, before Atlanta, Ga., 1 commissioned officer killed, 3
wounded; 13 enlisted men wounded.

Sept. 1st, Jonesboro, Ga., 1 commissioned officer killed, 6 enlisted men
killed, 29 wounded.


                            RECAPITULATION.

                   Commissioned officers killed    7
                   Commissioned officers wounded   4
                   Commissioned officers missing   2
                   Enlisted men killed            57
                   Enlisted men wounded          115
                   Enlisted men missing           21
                                                  ——
                               Total             206

                                      Respectfully submitted,
                                             (Signed.) Geo. W. Cook,
                                                     Captain Commanding.


                      REPORT OF SAVANNAH CAMPAIGN.

                        Headquarters 125th Regiment Illinois Volunteers,
                                Near Savannah, Ga., December 29th, 1864.

SIR: In pursuance of orders, I have the honor to respectfully submit the
following report of the operations of my command from the fall of
Atlanta to the fall of Savannah:

Reached Atlanta on the 4th day of September last, at which point it
remained in a state of inactivity, resting from the fatigues incurred on
the previous campaign, until the 29th of same month when, in connection
with the brigade, it started for Florence, Alabama, by rail, via
Chattanooga, Huntsville and Athens, to check the advance of Gen.
Forrest, who was marching through that district. It did not proceed as
far as Florence, owing to its having been ordered back to Huntsville on
train guard duty, and upon returning was prevented from rejoining the
balance of the troops composing the expedition, by the rapid rise of Elk
river.

Remained at Athens until the return of the brigade from Florence,
performing while there daily picket duty. Left the former place on the
13th day of October and reached Chattanooga on the 14th. Remained at the
last named point four days, when we started for and rejoined the corps
at Galeville, Ala., on the 22nd. Remained at this place several days,
when the column was headed toward Atlanta, Ga., which we reached Nov.
15th, having made short halts at Rome, Kingston and Cartersville.
Between the last named place and Atlanta, the command was engaged in
"demoralizing" the railroad, the extent of which will be found in
subjoined recapitulation.

On the 16th of November, having obtained a thorough outfit and forming a
part of the left wing of the grand army, it started for the "new base."
Reached Savannah 21st inst., upon the previous evacuation of the city,
and went into camp about two miles from the place, where it now remains
ready at any moment to "strike tents," hoping that its next field of
operations will be South Carolina. With the exception of a slight
skirmish with the enemy in front of Louisville, Ga., nothing occurred to
disturb the equilibrium of the march between Atlanta and Savannah.
During the entire march the command subsisted upon supplies found in the
country, (which were abundant) with the exception of five days issue
from the regular supplies, thus destroying vast quantities of material
belonging to the enemy, and contributing much to the bone and muscle of
the army.

Forage was obtained to subsist all animals including those captured.

This command destroyed no cotton or gins owing to the fact that such
duty was not assigned it. Deeming negroes an encumbrance they were
prohibited from attaching themselves to the command.

                                I am Sir
                                  Very Respectfully
                                     Your Obedient Servant,
                                       (Signed.) Geo. W. Cook,
                                            Captain Commanding Regiment.

            Number of miles railroad destroyed            2
            Cotton                                    none.
            Gins                                      none.
            Number of horses captured                     6
            Number of mules captured                     25
            Supplies obtained and brought to Savannah none.
            Enlisted men killed                           1
            Enlisted men wounded                          1


             CAMPAIGN REPORT FROM SAVANNAH TO BENTONVILLE.

                         Headquarters 125th Illinois Volunteer Infantry,
                                      Goldsboro. N. C, March 28th, 1865.

CAPTAIN: I have the honor to submit herewith a report of the operations
of my command from the day on which it left Savannah, Georgia, until I
assumed command of the brigade on 19th day of the present month:

January 20th, 1865. My command left camp at 7 o'clock a. m. and marched
8 miles on the Louisville road, and went into camp where we remained
four days. On the 24th of January regiment was ordered on fatigue duty,
cut poles and built 350 yards corduroy road.

January 25. Left camp at 7 a. m. and marched 18 miles.

January 26. Left camp at 7 a. m. and marched over very bad roads for 8
miles. Encamped for the night one mile north of Springfield, Ga.

January 27. Left camp at 7 a. m. This and the 22nd regiment Indiana
volunteers were detailed as train guards, both under my command. Guards
and trains were delayed nearly all day at the confluence of several
small streams called the "Runs." The command reached camp at 10 p. m.,
having marched but five miles.

January 28. Left camp at 8 a. m. and marched to within one mile of
Sister's Ferry on the Savannah river, where we went into camp and
remained until February 5th at 6 p. m., when the command crossed the
river and encamped on the South Carolina side, where it remained until
February 8th, when we marched at 7 a. m. and camped at night at
Brighton, having travelled only 7 miles, but over very bad roads.

February 9. Left camp at 7 a. m. and marched rapidly all day over good
roads. Made 20 miles and went into camp at 5 p. m.

February 10. Left camp at 6:30 a. m., marched 20 miles over good roads
and went into camp.

February 11. Left camp at 6:30 a. m. This and 22nd regiment Indiana
volunteers were detailed as train guards under my command. Marched
through Barnwell and reached camp late, having made about 12 miles.

February 12. Left camp at 6:30 a. m.; passed through Williston, on the
Augusta and Charleston railroad, about noon. Marched 18 miles and
encamped at night on the Edisto river.

February 13. Crossed the Edisto at 6:30 a. m, and worked on the north
side three hours building corduroy roads. Went into camp two miles
beyond the river at 10 a. m., and marched again at 1 p. m., moved five
miles and went into camp for night.

February 14. Left camp at 6:30 a. m. and marched 20 miles, crossing
north Edisto in the route.

February 15. Left camp at 7:30 a. m., marched 20 miles and encamped at
night two miles from Lexington.

February 16. Left camp at 6 a. m.; marched to near Columbia, S. C. On
the afternoon of this day the command made a retrograde movement five
miles and encamped at night on the south side of Saluda river.

February 17. Left camp at 6 a. m., crossed the Saluda, marched 20 miles
and encamped for the night on Broad river.

February 18. The command crossed Broad river at 9 a. m. and went into
position on the north side to the left and front of the 2nd brigade At 3
p. m. I was ordered with my regiment to make a reconnoisance towards the
Winnsboro road. Went about four miles, crossed Little river, and with
one company pushed skirmishers as far as directed. I then withdrew,
recrossed Little river and returned to camp.

February 19. The command tore up and effectually destroyed 475 yards of
railroad track and ties and marched four miles.

February 20. Marched at 6 a. m. and encamped on Little river.

February 21st. Left camp at 2 p. m. This and the 52nd Ohio regiment,
were detailed as rear guard for the corps train. Reached camp at 11 p.
m., having marched 15 miles.

February 22nd. Marched 6 miles and went into camp.

February 23rd. Marched 10 miles and went into camp.

February 24th. Crossed Catawba river. Regiment worked all day assisting
wagons out of the mud and corduroying roads.

February 25th. Worked all day on roads.

February 26th. Worked five companies all day on roads.

February 27th. No move. Worked five companies one half day on roads.

February 28th. Left camp at 1 p. m. Assisted part of corps train up the
hill on north side of Catawba river, after which the command marched
five miles as train guard, and reached camp at 10 p. m.

March 1st. Left camp at 6 a. m., and marched 21 miles.

March 2nd. Left camp at 6 a. m., and marched 13 miles.

March 3rd. Left camp at 6 a. m. This regiment with the 52nd O. V. I.,
under my command, were detailed as train guards; passed over some very
bad roads, and reached camp at 10 p. m., after a march of 23 miles.

March 4th. Left camp at 6 a. m., and encamped on the Great Pedee river
at 4 p. m. The regiment worked at corduroying roads until after dark.
The command remained in camp until March 7th, at 2 p. m., when it moved
down to the pontoon bridge, which it crossed at 4 p. m., after which it
marched one and one half miles and went into camp for the night.

March 8th. Left camp at 6 a. m. Marched 25 miles and went into camp at 6
p. m.

March 9th. Left camp at 8 a. m. This regiment, and the 52nd O. V. I.,
and one section of the 19th Ind. battery, all under my command, marched
as rear guard for the corps train. Crossed Downing creek at 3 p. m., and
destroyed the bridges. The vanguard of the enemy came up before the
destruction was complete, but upon observing us, it retired. My command
did not reach camp that night We assisted wagons out of the mud until 3
o'clock of the morning of March 10th when the jaded and exhausted
animals gave out, and the guards rested by the road side until day
light, when we resumed the labor of assisting wagons over the bad roads.
We reached the division camp at 8 a. m., where we rested one hour and
then resumed the march in column. Marched 15 miles and went into camp at
4 p. m.

March 11th. Left camp at 9 a. m. Marched to within two miles of
Fayetteville, N. C, and went into camp at 2 p. m.

March 12th. Left camp at 6 p. m. Crossed the Cape Fear river at 9 p. m.,
and went into camp behind rebel fortifications on the north side.

March 13th. Moved two miles for change of camp.

March 14th. Remained in camp all day.

March 15th. Left camp at 9 a. m. Marched 12 miles as rear guard for
trains.

March 16th. Left camp at 6 a. m. Marched about 8 miles and met the enemy
strongly entrenched near Black river, ready to dispute our further
advance. My regiment went into position about 2 p. m. on the right of
the second line. At 4 p. m. I moved in reserve of the brigade and at
sundown took position on the left of the front line for the purpose of
filling a gap then existing between the 1st and 3rd brigades. I
established my line within 74 yards of the enemies' line of
fortifications, and constructed works. My loss was one man wounded
severely. The enemy retreated during the night.

March 17th. Left camp at 8 a. m. Forded Black river and Black Mingo
creek, and after a march of 10 miles, went into camp for the night.

March 18th. Left camp at 5:30. Marched 11 miles and encamped at 1 p. m.
for the afternoon and night.

March 19th. Left camp at 9 a. m., and marched about four miles down the
Goldsboro road, at which point we left the road and turned to the right.
Moved about one half mile in this direction and went into position on
the right of the second line, in which position we remained about two
hours, when we, with the brigade, were ordered out, and directed to push
across to the road to our left. In this movement the brigade was in
single line with my regiment on the left. After wandering through
numerous swamps, over brush, vines and briars, we reached a position and
formed line parallel with the road. This advance was disputed all the
way by rebel skirmishers, to meet which I ordered out as skirmishers,
two companies commanded by Capt. Halloway. Our new formation on the road
was scarcely completed, when heavy firing on the right of the brigade,
denoted that the contest was to be a severe one. Stepping into the road
and casting my eye in the direction of the firing, I observed a strong
column of the enemy, four lines deep, moving against the point where I
supposed the right of the brigade rested. My suppositions soon proved
correct, and after a brief contest, I observed that the right was giving
away before the advance of the rebel column. At this instant a line of
rebels struck my front and that of the left wing of the 22nd Ind. on my
right. This line was met by our troops without yielding an inch, and
after a severe fight of five minutes, the rebels fell back and were
easily kept at bay, by a strong line of skirmishers. But not so on my
right, for by this time the main column of the enemy had advanced to
within one hundred yards of the right of my regiment, and the left wing
of the 22nd Ind. on my right was beginning to give way. My position was
fast becoming untenable, besides I was apprehensive that the confusion
incident to a repulse on the right of the brigade, might result to the
enemy's advantage, in making many captures, and I determined at once to
defeat, as far as possible, this object, and at the same time better my
own situation, to do which I immediately executed a change of front to
the rear, on left company, and then presented a front direct to that of
the enemy. This movement was not executed by the entire regiment at
once, nor after the approved system of battalion drill, but by detaching
two companies at a time from the right and placing them on the new
alignment. In this way I kept most of my line continually firing upon
the advancing column. This change, which gave me the advantage of a
direct fire, induced the enemy to move by its left flank and deploy his
four depth column to a double line formation, which movement again
threatened my right. On noticing this I again changed front to the rear
as before. Finding myself nearly surrounded and with no prospect of
support, I directed my regiment to retire firing, which was bravely done
as it had maintained every position in which it had been placed. My
left, which had not up to this time moved ten feet from its original
position on the Goldsboro road, was the last to withdraw, nor was this
done until the first line of the enemy was within fifty yards of my two
left companies, when they deployed as skirmishers and fell back firing.
I have no wish to make a bright picture for my regiment beyond what the
facts will justify. I have commanded it under very critical
circumstances on former occasions. I have witnessed the conduct of many
regiments in perilous situations, but I never saw a body of troops act
with greater coolness, or more heroic daring, than the 125th Ills,
manifested on the eventful 19th instant. When the enemy's firing was
hottest, my men were most earnest. Not one man left the ground until
ordered to do so. Every man seemed to appreciate that the efforts of the
regiment were being bent towards the safety of the brigade, and every
man was determined to do all in his power for that object. Far be it
from me to claim a higher quality of bravery for my men than belongs to
other troops of the brigade. If I were even disposed to be jealous of
the prowess of my own command, I could say nothing to disparage the
claims of other regiments to equal bravery with my own. _They_ were
suddenly attacked without warning, and in a position where their flank
was too boldly exposed, not to tempt the utmost efforts of the enemy to
fall vigorously upon it. Once started they were easily pressed back.
Being made aware of the situation on the right, I prepared my command
for any emergency. While all the officers and men of my command did
nobly, yet I cannot forbear to call special attention to the conspicuous
bravery of Captain Geo. W. Cook, acting field officer, and adjutant Wm.
Mann, for their eminent services in preserving at all times a good
alignment and directing the fire of different parts of the line. I also
commend to your notice, W. Blackeney, sergeant major; George W. B.
Sadorus, of company E; Barton Snyder, sergeant of company I, and Louis
Taft, corporal of company E, whose cool bravery and noble daring, won
for them the admiration of all who saw them. When my regiment withdrew
as far as the open field to the rear, I observed that Captain Snodgrass,
commanding the 22nd Ind., had formed the basis of a new alignment, about
three hundred yards to the rear and left of the first position. I
determined at once to form my regiment on his left, and directed the
colors to be placed on that prolongation, and formed line accordingly.
While this was being done, you reported to me that General Fearing was
wounded and disabled for further command. I immediately turned the
command of my regiment over to Captain Cook, and by virtue of seniority
in rank, assumed command of the brigade.

The subsequent operations of the regiment, will be reported by Captain
Cook.

                              I am, Captain, very respectfully,
                                            Your obedient servant.
                                        (Signed)     Jas. W. Langley,
                                            Lt Col. 125th Regt. I. V. I.

  To Charles Swift, Capt. and A. A. A. G,
      3rd Brigade, 2nd Division, 14th A. C.


                       BENTONVILLE TO GOLDSBORO.

                                   Headquarters 125th Illinois Infantry.
                                     Goldsboro, N. C., March 30th, 1865.

CAPTAIN: I have the honor to submit to you a report of the operations of
this command from the 19th inst. up to the time of its reaching this
place. Owing to the casualties in the 3rd brigade, 2nd division on the
19th, I was ordered to take command of this regiment at about 3 o'clock
p. m., just as the regiment had been withdrawn from a position parallel
with the Goldsboro road. Col. James W. Langley had reformed the regiment
in the open field on the left of the 22nd Indiana; here I took command
and had every man get a load of rails, and then moved the regiment
forward to the edge of the timber, where we built temporary works; the
22nd Indiana joined on our right, and a portion of the 20th A. C. on the
left. We scarcely had time to get our temporary works completed, when
the enemy advanced, as we supposed in two lines of battle. But they were
handsomely repulsed. I never saw men and officers fight with more
determination to win, than at this time. Here our loss was one man
killed and one wounded. We then sent out skirmishers in our front and
remained over night. At 8 a. m. on the morning of the 20th we were moved
to the right, in rear of the 1st brigade, in works the regiment had
built on the 19th. Here we were ordered to send 20 men and two
non-commissioned officers to bury the dead. They buried 27 rebels,
including two officers, and carried two wounded off the field. At 8 p.
m. my regiment was moved on the front line on the left of the 2nd
brigade, the 86th Illinois on my left. Here we formed temporary works.
We picketed our immediate front, built skirmish pits, and strengthened
our works. Twenty-first—nothing of importance transpired to day but
picket firing. I had one man wounded. On the morning of the 22nd, we
found the enemy had gone. We marched 8 miles in direction of Goldsboro
and camped for the night. Twenty-third—marched at 8 a. m.; arrived at
this place, after marching 13 miles, at 7 p. m. Since, we have been
resting from our labors. With this I forward a report of the casualties
in the command during the campaign up to the 23rd inst.

                               I am Captain Very Respectfully,
                                   Your Obedient Servant,
                                       (Signed.) Geo. W. Cook,
                                            Captain Commanding Regiment.

List of casualties in the 125th Illinois infantry during the late
campaign commencing January 20th and ending March 23rd, 1865:

March 19th,'65, commissioned officer wounded, 1.

March 19th, enlisted men killed, 2; wounded, 11; missing, 6.

                               Respectfully submitted,
                                    (Signed.) Geo. W. Cook,
                                            Captain Commanding Regiment.

Goldsboro, N. C., March 30th, 1865.


                      Roster of the 125th I. V. I

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │Date of Rank │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │             │   muster    │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
   _Colonels._   │           │             │             │
 Oscar F. Harmon │Danville   │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 4, 1862│Killed in battle
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 James W. Langley│Champaign  │May 10, 1865 │Not mustered │Mustered out (as
                 │           │             │             │  Lieut. Col.)
                 │           │             │             │  June 9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Lieut.     │           │             │             │
    Colonel._    │           │             │             │
 James W. Langley│Champaign  │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 4, 1862│Promoted.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Major._    │           │             │             │
 John B. Lee     │Catlin     │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 4, 1862│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Adjutant._   │           │             │             │
 William Mann    │Danville   │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 4, 1862│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
 _Quartermaster._│           │             │             │
 Alex M. Ayres   │Urbana     │Aug 29, 1862 │Aug. 29, 1862│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Surgeons._   │           │             │             │
 John J. McElroy │Catlin     │Dec. 24, 1862│             │Resigned April
                 │           │             │             │  14, 1864.
 Chas. H. Mills  │Champaign  │April 14,    │June 29, 1864│Mustered out June
                 │           │  1864       │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
    _1st Asst.   │           │             │             │
    Surgeons._   │           │             │             │
 Chas. H. Mills  │Champaign  │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 4, 1862│Promoted.
 Owen Wright     │Mason      │Aug. 21, 1864│Aug. 21, 1864│Resigned April 8,
                 │           │             │             │  1865.
                 │           │             │             │
    _2nd Asst.   │           │             │             │
    Surgeons._   │           │             │             │
 DeWitt C. Hentou│Myersville │March 1, 1863│Not mustered │Never joined
                 │           │             │             │  regiment.
 Joel F. Erving  │Kewanee    │May 14, 1863 │May 18, 1863 │Resigned February
                 │           │             │             │  3, 1864.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Chaplains._  │           │             │             │
 Levi W. Sanders │Vermilion  │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 4, 1862│Killed at
                 │  co.      │             │             │  Caldwell's
                 │           │             │             │  Ford, Tenn.,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 17, 1863.
 Geo. K. Buesing │           │April 25,    │July 17, 1864│Died October 13,
                 │           │  1864       │             │  1864.
                 │           │             │             │
  _Captains Co.  │           │             │             │
       A._       │           │             │             │
 Clark Ralston   │Danville   │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned January
                 │           │             │             │  17, 1863.
 Jackson Charles │Danville   │Jan. 17, 1863│March 30,    │Killed in action
                 │           │             │  1863       │  Sept. 1, '64.
 Jas. P Brown    │Danville   │Sept. 1, 1864│May 2, 1865  │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _First     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Chas. Jackson   │Danville   │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Promoted.
 Harrison Low    │Danville   │Jan. 17, 1863│Mar 30, 1863 │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Second     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Harrison Low    │Danville   │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Promoted.
 James P Brown   │Danville   │Jan. 17, 1863│Mar. 30, 1863│Promoted.
                 │           │             │             │
  _Captains Co.  │           │             │             │
       B._       │           │             │             │
 Robt. Stewart   │Newell     │Sept 4. 1862 │Sept. 3. 1862│Resigned December
                 │           │             │             │  18, '62.
 Stephen D.      │Ross       │Dec. 18, 1862│Feb. 1, 1863 │Honorably
   Connover      │           │             │             │  discharged May
                 │           │             │             │  15, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _First     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Wm. R. Wilson   │Newell     │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned
                 │           │             │             │  September 10,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Benj. F.        │Newell     │Sept. 10,    │Jan 17, 1865 │Mustered out June
   Bonedrake     │           │  1864       │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Second     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Stephen D.      │Ross       │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Promoted.
   Connover      │           │             │             │
 Jas. A. McLean  │Newell     │Dec. 18, 1862│Feb. 1, 1863 │Killed in action
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
                 │           │             │             │
  _Captains Co.  │           │             │             │
       C._       │           │             │             │
 William W.      │Danville   │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Killed in action
   Fellows       │           │             │             │  June 27, 64.
 Andrew W.       │Danville   │June 27, 1864│Sept. 9, 1864│Died February 15,
   Ingraham      │           │             │             │  1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _First     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Alexander       │Danville   │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned December
   Pollock       │           │             │             │  24, 1863.
 Andrew W.       │Danville   │Dec. 24, 1862│Feb. 22, 1864│Promoted.
   Ingraham      │           │             │             │
 David M. Hays   │Vance      │June 27, 1861│Sept. 9, 1864│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Second     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 James D. New    │Vance      │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned January
                 │           │             │             │  2, 1864.
                 │           │             │             │
  _Captains Co.  │           │             │             │
       D._       │           │             │             │
 Geo. W. Galloway│Georgetown │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _First     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 James B. Stevens│Vermilion  │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept 3, 1862 │Resigned
                 │  co.      │             │             │  September 6,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Oliver Finley   │Georgetown │July 19, 1864│Sept. 5, 1864│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Second     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 John L. Jones   │Vermilion  │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Killed in action
                 │  co.      │             │             │  July 19, '64.
                 │           │             │             │
  _Captains Co.  │           │             │             │
       E._       │           │             │             │
 Nathan M. Claak │Champaign  │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Honorably
                 │           │             │             │  discharged
                 │           │             │             │  January 13,
                 │           │             │             │  1865.
 G. W. B. Sadorus│Sadorus    │April 20,    │May 20, 1865 │Mustered out June
                 │           │  1865       │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _First     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Wm. G. Isom     │Champaign  │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned February
                 │           │             │             │  8, 1864.
 Geo. Scroggs    │Champaign  │Feb. 8, 1864 │             │Promoted Adjutant
                 │           │             │             │  60th Reg.
                 │           │             │             │  Mustered out
                 │           │             │             │  June 26, '65.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Second     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 John Urquhart   │Sadorus    │Sept. 3, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned January
                 │           │             │             │  20, 1863.
 Martin V. Stone │Champaign  │Mar. 30, 1863│Mar. 30, 1863│Resigned June 22,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Geo. Scroggs    │Champaign  │June 22, 1863│July 13, 1863│Promoted.
                 │           │             │             │
  _Captains Co.  │           │             │             │
       F._       │           │             │             │
 Fredrick B. Sale│Newcomb    │Sept. 3, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned January
                 │           │             │             │  24, 1863.
 John B. Lester  │Newcomb    │Mar. 30, 1863│Mar. 30, 1863│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _First     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 John B. Lester  │Newcomb    │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Promoted.
 Wm. R. Shoup    │Newcomb    │Jan. 24, 1863│Mar. 30, 1863│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Second     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Alfred Johnson  │East Bend  │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned January
                 │           │             │             │  11, 1863.
 Wm. R Shoup     │Newcomb    │Jan. 11, 1863│Feb. 1, 1863 │Promoted.
 John J. White   │Newcomb    │Jan. 24, 1863│Mar. 30, 1863│Killed in action
                 │           │             │             │  near Atlanta,
                 │           │             │             │  Georgia, Aug.
                 │           │             │             │  7, 1864.
                 │           │             │             │
  _Captains Co.  │           │             │             │
       G._       │           │             │             │
 John H. Gass    │Catlin     │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned December
                 │           │             │             │  30, 1862.
 Josiah Lee      │Fairmount  │Dec. 30, 1862│Jan. 31, 1863│Resigned February
                 │           │             │             │  7, 1864.
 Marion Lee      │Fairmount  │Feb. 7, 1864 │Mar. 23, 1864│Killed in action
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Newton Norris   │Danville   │June 27, 1864│Sept. 5, 1864│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _First     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Ephriam S.      │Catlin     │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned January
   Howell        │           │             │             │  22, 1863.
 Marion Lee      │Fairmount  │Jan. 22, 1863│July 28, 1863│Promoted.
 Elisha Littler  │Catlin     │Feb. 7, 1864 │Mar. 26, 1865│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Second     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Josiah Lee      │Fairmount  │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Promoted Captain.
 Marion Lee      │Fairmount  │Dec. 30, 1862│Jan. 31, 1863│Promoted.
 Newton Norris   │Danville   │Jan. 22, 1863│             │Promoted Captain.
                 │           │             │             │
  _Captains Co.  │           │             │             │
       H._       │           │             │             │
 Pleasant M.     │Urbana     │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned April
   Parks         │           │             │             │  16, 1864.
 John C. Harbor  │Champaign  │April 16,    │Nov. 1, 1864 │Mustered out June
                 │           │  1864       │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _First     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 David A. Brenton│Middletown │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned January
                 │           │             │             │  1, 1863.
 John C. Harbor  │Champaign  │Jan. 1, 1863 │Feb. 8, 1863 │Promoted.
 Saml. M. Dunseth│Urbana     │April 16,    │Nov. 2, 1864 │Mustered out June
                 │           │  1864       │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Second     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 John C. Harbor  │Champaign  │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Promoted.
 Saml. M. Dunseth│Urbana     │Jan. 1, 1863 │Feb. 8, 1863 │Promoted.
                 │           │             │             │
  _Captains Co.  │           │             │             │
       I._       │           │             │             │
 Levin Vinson    │Pilot      │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned February
                 │           │             │             │  29, 1864.
 Edwd. B.        │           │Feb. 29, 1864│Mar. 23, 1864│Died of wounds
   Kingsbury     │           │             │             │  Aug. 18, '64.
 James H. Trimmel│Pilot      │Aug. 18, 1864│April 9, 1865│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _First     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 John K. Vinson  │Pilot      │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned November
                 │           │             │             │  21, '62.
 Edwd. B.        │           │Nov. 25, 1862│Dec. 16, 1862│Promoted.
   Kingsbury     │           │             │             │
 James H. Trimmel│Pilot      │Feb. 29, 1864│April 9, 1865│Promoted.
 Geo. A. Clapp   │Pilot      │Aug. 18, 1864│Nov. 2, 1864 │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Second     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Stephen Brothers│Pilot      │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned March
                 │           │             │             │  27, 1863.
 James H. Trimmel│Pilot      │March 27, '63│April 20,    │Promoted.
                 │           │             │  1863       │
                 │           │             │             │
  _Captains Co.  │           │             │             │
       K._       │           │             │             │
 Geo. W. Cook    │Catlin     │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _First     │           │             │             │
   Lieutenant._  │           │             │             │
 Oliver P. Hunt  │Dallas     │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
     _Second     │           │             │             │
  Lieutenants._  │           │             │             │
 Joseph F. Crosby│Catlin     │Sept. 4, 1862│Sept. 3, 1862│Resigned June 22,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 William B.      │Dallas     │June 22, 1863│             │Resigned October
   Galway        │           │             │             │  15, 1864.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


            One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Ills. Vols. Reg't.
                         THREE YEARS' SERVICE.


                        NON-COMMISSIONED STAFF.

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
    _Sergeant    │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
     Majors._    │           │             │             │
 Edward B.       │Danville   │July 16      │September 3  │Promoted 1st
   Kingsbury     │           │             │             │  Lieut. Co. I.
 George Scroggs  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │September 3  │Promoted 2d
                 │           │             │             │  Lieut. Co. E.
 Benj. F.        │Vermilion  │Aug. 10      │September 3  │Promoted 1st
   Bonebrake     │  co.      │             │             │  Lieut. Co. B.
 Thomas W.       │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │September 3  │Mustered out June
   Blakeney      │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
      _Q. M.     │           │             │             │
    Sergeant._   │           │             │             │
 David H. Beasley│Champaign  │Aug. 14      │September 3  │Mustered out July
                 │           │             │             │  29, 1865; was
                 │           │             │             │  prisoner.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Commissary   │           │             │             │
   Sergeants._   │           │             │             │
 Harvey J.       │Vermilion  │             │September 3  │Reduced at his
   Steward       │  co.      │             │             │  own request,
                 │           │             │             │  and assigned to
                 │           │             │             │  Co. K.
 Bernard G. Parks│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │September 3  │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
    _Hospital    │           │             │             │
    Stewards._   │           │             │             │
 Benjamin F.     │Newcomb    │Aug. 7       │September 3  │Discharged June
   Fagan         │           │             │             │  18, 1863.
 Abram A. Sulcer │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │September 3  │Pro. Ass't
                 │           │             │             │  Surgeon 11th
                 │           │             │             │  Ill. Inf.
 Edwin J. Draper │Danville   │Aug. 14      │September 3  │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
    _Principal   │           │             │             │
   Musicians._   │           │             │             │
 William A.      │Vance      │July 20      │September 3  │Mustered out June
   Payton        │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Curtis H. Tanzey│Pilot      │Aug. 12      │September 3  │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                      ENLISTED MEN OF COMPANY "A."

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
      _First     │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
    Sergeant._   │           │             │             │
 James P. Brown  │Danville   │Aug 13       │Sept. 3      │Promoted 2nd
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Sergeants._  │           │             │             │
 Sylvester Hooten│Danville   │July 18      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 William A. Myers│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Sg't.
 Spencer Shumate │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Discharged May 6,
                 │           │             │             │  '63, as
                 │           │             │             │  private; on
                 │           │             │             │  account
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 John Brody      │Danville   │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Corporals._  │           │             │             │
 William D.      │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Huffman       │           │             │             │  9, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  private. Absent
                 │           │             │             │  on furlough.
 Isaac M. Emile  │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Trans. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps.
 Bluford S.      │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Graves        │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │  Furlough.
 John Collihen   │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Died, Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Dec. 6, '62.
 William F.      │Danville   │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
   Henthorn      │           │             │             │  Mt., June 27,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Jacob Grimes    │Danville   │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  private.
 John H. Martin  │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │M. O. July 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  private; was
                 │           │             │             │  prisoner.
 Joseph Megee    │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 4      │Died at Danville,
                 │           │             │             │  Ky.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Musicians._  │           │             │             │
 Nathaniel Clyne │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Died at Gallatin,
                 │           │             │             │  Tenn., Jan. 24,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Isaiah Cummings │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Privates._   │           │             │             │
 Bensel, John H. │Danville   │July 18      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Barnhart,       │Danville   │July 18      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 10,
   Jonathan      │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Bryant, Robert  │Danville   │July 18      │Sept. 3      │Died at
   S.            │           │             │             │  Nashville,
                 │           │             │             │  Tenn., Nov. 30,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Beck, Ferry     │Danville   │July 18      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Beatly, George  │Danville   │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
                 │           │             │             │  Mt., June 27,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
 Bonnet, John    │Danville   │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Callihan.       │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Disch. March 8,
   Sanford P.    │           │             │             │  '64;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Conner, James W.│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Disch. March 21,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Clingin, Nathan │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Died at Quincy,
                 │           │             │             │  Ill., Jan. 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Curtis, Andrew  │Danville   │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │Missing at
   J.            │           │             │             │  Kenesaw Mt.,
                 │           │             │             │  Ga., since June
                 │           │             │             │  27, 1864.
 Clymon, Hyram   │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Trans. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps Sept. 14,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Cooley, John B. │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Cummings, James │Danville   │July 28      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 15.
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Cook, Alonzo H. │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 6,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Cole, George S. │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Douglas, Thomas │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 3,
   S.            │           │             │             │  1863;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Draper, James S.│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │  Furlough.
 Fugit, John M.  │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out July
                 │           │             │             │  1, 1865; was
                 │           │             │             │  prisoner.
 Fagan, Marlon   │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corporal.
 Finley, James   │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Finley, Asbury  │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   D.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Fletcher, Ferris│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Gillelan,       │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Wilford H.    │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Gouge, Kavanaugh│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   W.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Guthrie, Michael│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 13,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Highotte, George│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Disch. March 11,
   L.            │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Henderson,      │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Obediah       │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hortley, Amos A.│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 14,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Hathway, George │Danville   │July 26      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville,
                 │           │             │             │  Tenn., Sept. 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '64; wounds.
 Hill, James W.  │Danville   │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hooten, Charles │Danville   │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   B.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hensley, James  │Danville   │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   F.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hart, Joseph    │Danville   │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Jordan, Dudley  │Danville   │July 24      │Sept. 3      │Trans. to V. R.
                 │           │             │             │  C., July 29,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Knight, Johnson │Danville   │July 18      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   F.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Linn, Francis M.│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Disch. March 11,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Layton, Andrew  │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   J.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Lafferty,       │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Corporal killed
   Patrick       │           │             │             │  at Kenesaw,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Lafferty,       │Danville   │Aug. 2       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out May
   William H.    │           │             │             │  18, 1865.
 Lope, Jesse     │Danville   │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died in
                 │           │             │             │  Andersonville
                 │           │             │             │  prison, Oct. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '64. No. of
                 │           │             │             │  grave, 10,179.
 Ludington, John │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   G. W.         │           │             │             │  9, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Lope, Zachariah │Danville   │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Low,            │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Hollingsworth │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Mann, Sylvester │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   B.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Milliner, Gerard│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 13,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Morman, Charles │Danville   │July 17      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   C.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Meadows, William│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Morgan, Evans   │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
                 │           │             │             │  Furlough.
 McFarland, James│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   H.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Morgan, Alford  │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   C.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 McGregor, Gregor│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Olehy, Dennis   │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Olehy, William  │Danville   │July 17      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   J.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.  as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Olehy, George W.│Danville   │Aug. 17      │Sept. 3      │Disch. June 10,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Phillips, John  │Danville   │July 17      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 17,
                 │           │             │             │  63; disability.
 Quillen, James  │Danville   │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Deserted Oct. 3,
   W.            │           │             │             │  1862.
 Ramsey, Mordecai│Danville   │July 17      │Sept. 3      │Deserted May 7,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
 Rodgers, Samuel │Danville   │July 17      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 20,
                 │           │             │             │  1863;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Shumate, William│Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Shumate, Daniel │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Smith, William  │Danville   │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   H.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Smith, William  │Danville   │July 20      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 10,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Tennery, Cyrus  │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   F.            │           │             │             │  9, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corporal.
 Wilson. David D.│Danville   │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Disch. March 7,
                 │           │             │             │  '63; disability
 Williams, John  │Danville   │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Wilson, William │Danville   │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 10,
   F.            │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Wooley, George  │Danville   │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   C.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │  Furlough.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Butt, Nathaniel │           │             │             │Deserted June,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Graves, Joseph  │           │             │             │Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Chattanooga,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 14, '64.
 Lafferty, Edward│           │Mar. 30, 1863│Mar. 30, 1863│Killed at
   M.            │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Pruett, Willis  │Danville   │             │             │Trans. to V. R.
                 │           │             │             │  C., July 29,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                      ENLISTED MEN OF COMPANY "B."

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
   _Sergeants._  │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
 John W. McKibben│Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Oct.
                 │           │             │             │  23, 1862.
 John R. Lockhart│Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  20, 1863.
 Newell Duncan   │Middle Fork│Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, Pvt.
 James A. McLean │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Promoted 2d
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Corporals._  │           │             │             │
 Ransom McLean   │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as Pvt.
 Henry D. Parks  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at Gallatin,
                 │           │             │             │  T., Feb. 6,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 James Duncan    │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged June
                 │           │             │             │  16, 1863.
 Charles S.      │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
   Carter        │           │             │             │  23, 1863.
 Thomas J. Price │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged June
                 │           │             │             │  7, 1863.
 George A.       │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 17,
   Collins       │           │             │             │  '63, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Geo. W.         │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Dec. 10,
   Cunningham    │           │             │             │  '64, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant;
                 │           │             │             │  wounded.
 Jarret W.       │Grant      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at
   Cunningham    │           │             │             │  Nashville,
                 │           │             │             │  Tenn., April
                 │           │             │             │  26, 1863.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Privates._   │           │             │             │
 Adams, Robert   │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died of wounds at
                 │           │             │             │  Atlanta, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  June 11, '64,
                 │           │             │             │  in enemy's
                 │           │             │             │  hands.
 Bean, Levi      │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Bell, Elijah R. │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Nov.
                 │           │             │             │  22, 1862.
 Biehler, James  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at Bowling
   E.            │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Dec. 15, '62.
 Biddle, Ephraim │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   W.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Bigham, Martin  │Jordan     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged March
   L.            │           │             │             │  20, 1863.
 Bonebrake, Benj.│Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Promoted Sergeant
   F.            │           │             │             │  Major.
 Brewer, William │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  12, 1863.
 Brown, Henry    │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  21, 1863.
 Brown, John     │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Oct.
                 │           │             │             │  23, 1862.
 Carter, Isaac   │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Carter, Marion  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Deserted Oct. 15,
                 │           │             │             │  1862.
 Carter,         │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Zachariah     │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Chandler,       │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at Richmond,
   William F.    │           │             │             │  Va., from
                 │           │             │             │  inhuman
                 │           │             │             │  treatment in
                 │           │             │             │  prison.
 Cox, John W.    │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville,
                 │           │             │             │  Tenn., Nov. 18,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Cox, Joseph M.  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Trans. to V. R.
                 │           │             │             │  C. May 3, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │  Mustered out
                 │           │             │             │  Aug. 22, '65,
                 │           │             │             │  as Corporal.
 Edwards, Jacob  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   H.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Elwell,         │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Alexander     │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Etchison, Jacob │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Oct
                 │           │             │             │  23, 1862.
 Fisher, James H.│Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Louisville,
                 │           │             │             │  Ky., Dec. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  1862.
 Fisher, John    │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Gillan, Joshua  │Middle Fork│Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died of wounds
   C.            │           │             │             │  rec'd at Big
                 │           │             │             │  Shanty, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  June 30, 1864.
 Grider, Albert  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  28, '63.
 Gutches, James  │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   H.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hamlin, David B.│Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged May
                 │           │             │             │  24, 1865.
 Helmick,        │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Killed, Kenesaw,
   Benjamin      │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Keith, William  │Blunt      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  1, 1864.
 Kelley, Patrick │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  3, 1863.
 Kimball, William│Blunt      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   H.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 King, William C.│Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865. as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Lang, George W. │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Must'd out July
                 │           │             │             │  1, '65; was
                 │           │             │             │  pris
 Leonard, Philip │Blunt      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Leonard, John F.│Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Lewis, Charles  │Carroll    │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Dec.
   A.            │           │             │             │  24, 1862.
 Lockhart, Joseph│Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   C.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corporal.
 Marsh, Daniel A.│Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 23, '62.
 Marshall, John  │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   H.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 McElhany, Felix.│Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Moore, James R. │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 2      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65. as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Morrison,       │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Dennis.       │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Norton, Scott.  │Grant      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65. as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Peak, Uriah W.  │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Ritchie, Samuel │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick at
   A.            │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Ritchie, James  │Mound, Ind.│Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Rohrer, Ezra P. │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Rogers, Robert  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   M.            │           │             │             │  9, '65. as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Ross, Hiram W.  │Danville   │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Aug.
                 │           │             │             │  16, 1863.
 Ross, Isaac F.  │Grant      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corporal.
 Ross, James T.  │Danville   │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Trans. to V. R.
                 │           │             │             │  C., Sept. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Ross, Nelson E. │Grant      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Sanburn, Richard│Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   J.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Shaw, Loring D. │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Smith, Charles  │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   W.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Smith, Martin V.│Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Starr, John B.  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │1st Serg't. Died
                 │           │             │             │  at home Mar. 2,
                 │           │             │             │  64.
 Starr, Simon    │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Dec
                 │           │             │             │  26, 1862.
 Steward, Harvey │Edgar Co.  │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Promoted
   J.            │           │             │             │  Commissary
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Thralls, William│Blunt      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Serg't.  Died of
   L.            │           │             │             │  wounds received
                 │           │             │             │  at Jonesboro,
                 │           │             │             │  Ga., Sept 2,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
 Watkins, Isaiah │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Weiford, David  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   G.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Wiggins, George │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Dec.
   W.            │           │             │             │  26, 1862.
 Wiggins, Jacob  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   W.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corporal.
 Wiggins, James  │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   P.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Wilson, Amos A. │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Williams, Abner │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Deserted Oct 2,
   S.            │           │             │             │  1862.
 Williamson,     │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died Danville,
   Rignel G.     │           │             │             │  Ky., Nov. 2,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Willey, Richard │Grant      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Dec. 10, '62.
 Yocum, John     │Ross       │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  12, 1863.
 Yates, John     │Newell     │Aug. 10, '62 │Sept. 3, '62 │Killed at Kenesaw
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64
 Young, Leonard  │Grant      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  26, 1862
 Young, Isaac    │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at Gallatin,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 29, '62.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Huddleson,      │Ross       │Dec. 1, '63  │Dec. 1, '63  │Disch. Oct. 24,
   William       │           │             │             │  '64, wounds.
 Jones, John W.  │Vermilion  │             │             │Died at
                 │  Co.      │             │             │  Nashville, Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  17, '62.
 Knox, James     │Newell     │             │             │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Rutledge,       │Ross       │Nov. 23, '63 │Nov. 23, '63 │Trans. to Co. B,
   Abraham       │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf
 Sheets, Franklin│Ross       │Dec. 21, '63 │Dec. 21, '63 │Trans. to Co. B,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                      ENLISTED MEN OF COMPANY "C."

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
      _First     │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
    Sergeant._   │           │             │             │
 A. W. Ingraham  │Danville   │July 16      │Sept. 3      │Promoted 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Sergeants._  │           │             │             │
 Jas. H. McKee   │Danville   │July 16      │Sept. 3      │Private. Disch.
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 9, '63,
                 │           │             │             │  for promotion
                 │           │             │             │  in 5th Ky.
                 │           │             │             │  cavalry
 Josiah H. French│Danville   │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │1st Serg't.
                 │           │             │             │  Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw Mt.,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27. 1864.
 Wm. J. Davis    │Danville   │July 22      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Oct. 23,
                 │           │             │             │  '62, as 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 David M. Hays   │Vance      │July 22      │Sept. 3      │Promoted 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Corporals._  │           │             │             │
 Henry C. Gardner│Danville   │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out May
                 │           │             │             │  15, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  pvt.
 Joseph W. Sennit│Danville   │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │Discharged April
                 │           │             │             │  18, 1863.
 James G. Payton │Vance      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Thomas J. Cox   │Vance      │Aug. 3       │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  18. '63.
 Augustus H.     │Danville   │Aug. 3       │Sept. 3      │Died at Nashville
   Keric         │           │             │             │  April 8, '63.
 James Ellison   │Rossville  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Nov.
                 │           │             │             │  10, 1862.
 Wm. E. Martin   │Danville   │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Discharged May 2,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Julius T.       │Danville   │Aug. 14      │Sept. 4      │Discharged May 5,
   Culbertson    │           │             │             │  1863.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Musicians._  │           │             │             │
 Charles Last    │Danville   │Aug. 3       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Wm. A. Payton   │Vance      │July 20      │Sept. 3      │Promoted
                 │           │             │             │  Principal
                 │           │             │             │  Musician.
                 │           │             │             │
    _Wagoner._   │           │             │             │
 John Devore     │Danville   │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  16, 1863.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Privates._   │           │             │             │
 Allman, Levi    │Vance      │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │Died April 2,
                 │           │             │             │  1865; wounds.
 Bloomfield, Saml│Pilot      │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  10, 1863.
 Board, George   │Vance      │Aug. 20      │Sept. 3      │Corp. Trans. to
                 │           │             │             │  I. C. Sept. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '63
 Backman, Isaac  │Blount     │July 22      │Sept. 3      │Died Sept. 26,
                 │           │             │             │  1864; wounds.
 Blevins, Clark  │Vance      │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   M.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Bogart, John    │Vance      │Aug. 21      │Sept. 3      │Died at home,
                 │           │             │             │  April 7, 1863
 Baker, Isaac S. │Danville   │Aug. 21      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Harrodsburg,
                 │           │             │             │  Ky., Nov. 19,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Barker. Wm. M.  │Danville   │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Discharged March
                 │           │             │             │  3, 1863.
 Cushman,        │Vance      │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick, at
   Jonathan      │           │             │             │  muster-out of
                 │           │             │             │  Regiment
 Cruzan, Benjamin│Danville   │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Oct.
                 │           │             │             │  23, 1862.
 Deakin. Wm. M.  │Vance      │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Discharged July
                 │           │             │             │  24, 1863.
 Dickson, Simon  │Pilot      │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died at Nashville
   A.            │           │             │             │  June 2, '63.
 Deakin, John    │Vance      │July 22      │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick, at
                 │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Dobbins, Saml.  │Danville   │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 25,
   S.            │           │             │             │  '65; wounds.
 Davis, Geo. W.  │Ross       │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 15,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Draper, Edwin J.│Danville   │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Promoted Hospital
                 │           │             │             │  Steward.
 Fellows, Henry  │Vance      │July 22      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  18, 1863.
 Frownfelter, A. │Danville   │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Disch. March 14.
   W.            │           │             │             │  '63, as Corp'l.
 Flaugherty, Owen│Danville   │Aug. 21      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Grannshaw, Abram│Danville   │Aug. 3       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65. as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l
 Gray, Matthew   │Vance      │July 22      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65. as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't
 Gray, David     │Vance      │July 22      │Sept. 3      │Corp. Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw July 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Gray, William   │Vance      │July 22      │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64
 Gardner, Wm. B. │Danville   │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  20, 1863.
 Hart, George    │Vance      │Aug. 20      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Heller, A. J.   │Danville   │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out July
                 │           │             │             │  1, 1865.
 Hoover, Albert  │Grant      │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
   W.            │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Holycross, Wm.  │Danville   │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Johnson, Charles│           │Aug. 5       │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
   Vance         │           │             │             │  28, 1863.
 Kingsbury, E. B │Danville   │July 16      │Sept. 3      │Promoted Sergeant
                 │           │             │             │  Major.
 Kilpatrick, Jas.│Danville   │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   D.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Kimball, Nelson │Danville   │Aug. 20      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out July
                 │           │             │             │  1, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't; was
                 │           │             │             │  prisoner.
 Lucas, William  │Vance      │July 22      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Mapes, Marcellus│Vance      │July 20      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  22, '65.
 McCarty, Jas. S.│Vance      │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Deserted Dec. 4,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 McCoy, Saml. P. │Danville   │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Mead, Charles   │Grant      │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │Killed,
                 │           │             │             │  Caldwell's
                 │           │             │             │  Ford, on Tenn.
                 │           │             │             │  river, Sept.
                 │           │             │             │  29, '62.
 McVey, John     │Danville   │Aug. 20      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corporal.
 Masters, Jas. L.│Danville   │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │A deserter from
                 │           │             │             │  39th Ind.
                 │           │             │             │  arrested and
                 │           │             │             │  returned to his
                 │           │             │             │  com. Dec. 12,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Mathews, Thos.  │Danville   │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Must. out June 9,
   A.            │           │             │             │  '65, as Serg't
 Mins, Chas. K.  │Vance      │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Must. out June 9,
   Jr.           │           │             │             │  '65.
 Majors, Samuel  │Blunt      │Aug. 21      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  20, '64, as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 O'Toole, Peter  │Blunt      │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │Must. out July
                 │           │             │             │  22, '65; was
                 │           │             │             │  pris.
 O'Toole, Samuel │Newell     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Nov.
                 │           │             │             │  2, 1863.
 Oliver, Robt. W.│Newell     │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Absent sick at
                 │           │             │             │  muster-out
                 │           │             │             │  Regt.
 Perry, Commodore│Ross       │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  26. 1863.
 Prickett, Oliver│Danville   │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Pfitzinger,     │Danville   │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
   Jacob         │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Radcliff, Felix │Vance      │July 22      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  18, 1863.
 Richards, R. E. │Danville   │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Discharged March
                 │           │             │             │  18, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't; wounds.
 Shepherd, George│Vance      │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Trans. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps Sept. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Shepherd Isaac  │Vance      │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
   V.            │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Southard, John  │Danville   │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick, at
   B.            │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Short, James P. │Peru       │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Smith, Chas. S. │Danville   │July 25      │Sept. 3      │M. O. July 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Corp'l;
                 │           │             │             │  was prisoner.
 Shanks, John D. │Grant      │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Died Sept. 7,
                 │           │             │             │  '64; wounds.
 Thair, Nathan   │Grant      │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Trans. to marine
                 │           │             │             │  service, Mar.
                 │           │             │             │  11, '63.
 Wallen, Jacob   │Pilot      │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Trans. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps Sept. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Wilkins, William│Vance      │July 22      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  musician.
 Wolf, Michael A.│Danville   │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Serg't.
 Winning, Geo. H.│Grant      │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65.
 Winning David M.│Grant      │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Died
                 │           │             │             │  Andersonville
                 │           │             │             │  pris., Sept.
                 │           │             │             │  14, '64. No. of
                 │           │             │             │  grave, 8,755.
 White, Wm. A.   │Danville   │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  27, 1863.
 Webb, John      │Georgetown │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Bates, Thomas   │Danville   │             │             │Discharged Mar.
                 │           │             │             │  3, '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disabil.
 Buesing. Geo. K.│Danville   │Dec. 29, 1863│Dec. 29, 1863│Promoted
                 │           │             │             │  Chaplain.
 Black, William  │Danville   │Dec. 29, 1863│Dec. 29, 1863│Trans. to Co. C,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Calvert,        │Vermilion  │             │             │Died at Nashville
   Hutchinson    │  co.      │             │             │  Dec. 18,'62.
 Lord, Oscar D.  │Chicago    │Oct. 5, 1864 │Oct. 5, 1864 │Trans. to Co. C.
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill., Inf.
 McCue, Thomas   │Danville   │             │             │Deserted Sept.
                 │           │             │             │  13, 1862.
 O'Connor, Wm.   │Danville   │Nov. 18, 1863│Nov. 18, 1863│Trans. to Co. C,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Williams,       │Danville   │             │             │Mustered out June
   William       │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                      ENLISTED MEN OF COMPANY "D."

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
      _First     │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
    Sergeant._   │           │             │             │
 Oliver Finley   │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Promoted 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Sergeants._  │           │             │             │
 William J.      │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Brinkley      │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Geo. V. Baker   │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Discharged Feb. —
                 │           │             │             │  1863, as
                 │           │             │             │  private:
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Edmund W. Eakin │Dallas     │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │1st Serg. Absent,
                 │           │             │             │  sick, at M. O.
                 │           │             │             │  of Reg't.
 Elim Golden     │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Private.  Tr. to
                 │           │             │             │  Inv. Corps,
                 │           │             │             │  Sept 1, '63.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Corporals._  │           │             │             │
 Isaac E Parks   │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Martin L. Hill  │Dallas     │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Noah Long       │Dallas     │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Private. Tr. to
                 │           │             │             │  E. Corps, Aug.
                 │           │             │             │  15, '64.
 Jacob B. Clifton│Vermilion  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out
                 │  co.      │             │             │  June, 9, '65,
                 │           │             │             │  as Sergeant.
 Wm. J. Stevens  │Vermilion  │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Disch. March 22,
                 │  co.      │             │             │  '63, as
                 │           │             │             │  private;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Carroll Moore   │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Private. Killed
                 │           │             │             │  at Atlanta,
                 │           │             │             │  Ga., July 19,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Jordan J. Drake │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Serg't. Absent,
                 │           │             │             │  sick, at M. O.
                 │           │             │             │  of Reg't.
 David S. Tucker │Georgetown │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Disch. June 16,
                 │           │             │             │  '63, as Serg't;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Privates._   │           │             │             │
 Alexander,      │Vermilion  │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Harvey        │  co.      │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corporal.
 Brennan, Patrick│Vermilion  │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │  co.      │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Black, Franklin │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Chattanooga,
                 │           │             │             │  T., July 5,
                 │           │             │             │  '64; wounds.
 Bisner,         │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out July
   Cornelius     │           │             │             │  15, 1865; was
                 │           │             │             │  prisoner.
 Baily, Chas. R. │Vermilion  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Cowen, Wm. C.   │           │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │
 Cook, Frank     │Georgetown │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Canaday, H. D.  │Georgetown │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Clipson, John C.│Vermilion  │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out May
                 │           │             │             │  18, 1865.
 Clary, Robt.    │Vermilion  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 27,
                 │           │             │             │  '65 as Corp'l;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Cook, Zachens   │Vermilion  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Eng.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Aug. 24,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Caton, Richard  │Vermilion  │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Oct. 24,
                 │           │             │             │  1862;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Cotton, Allen   │Georgetown │Aug. 19      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Douglas, Payton │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick at
                 │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Downs, John W.  │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Aug. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  1863;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Dye, John S.    │Georgetown │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │M. O. May 22,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Corp'l.
 Dillon, George  │Georgetown │Aug. 31      │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick, at
                 │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Draper, John    │Georgetown │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Died at Nashville
                 │           │             │             │  March 1, '63.
 Donnovan, Chas. │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Dickerson, F. M.│Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Corp'l. Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  6, '62.
 Elliott, Eli    │Elwood     │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Louisville,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 16, '62.
 Fleming, Martin │Georgetown │Sept. 3      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 27,
                 │           │             │             │  1863;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Frazier, William│Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Glaze, Samuel   │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Gauts, John J.  │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Guess, Thomas   │Georgetown │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Golden, Richard │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Corp'l.
 Gauts, Henry C. │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died, Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Dec. 10, '62.
 Gephart, J. M.  │Dallas     │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Graves, John L. │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at home Dec
                 │           │             │             │  3, 1864.
 Hinton, Benjamin│Vermilion  │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hinton, William │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hesler, A. J.   │Georgetown │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Haworth, Solomon│Georgetown │Aug. 23      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hayett, Jas. H. │Vermilion  │Aug. 11.     │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hall, James R.  │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Mar. 19,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Jordan, Geo. W. │Georgetown │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Jonesboro,
                 │           │             │             │  Sept. 1, '64.
 Kistler, J. J.  │Vermilion  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   B.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 King, Thomas    │Georgetown │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Lamar, James    │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Lamar, Frank    │Vermilion  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died, Resaca, May
                 │           │             │             │  16, '64; w'ds.
 Lockett, John W.│Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out May
                 │           │             │             │  17, 1865.
 Loveall,        │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at
   Eugenius      │           │             │             │  Nashville,
                 │           │             │             │  April 10, '63.
 Long, Wm. L.    │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Long, Chas. F.  │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 McClure, Geo. W.│Georgetown │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Oct. 25,
                 │           │             │             │  '62;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 McDonald, A. A. │Pontiac    │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Disch. May 4,
                 │           │             │             │  1863;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Melton, William │Georgetown │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Edgefield, Nov.
                 │           │             │             │  9, '62.
 Martin, John M. │Georgetown │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Disch. March 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Morgan,         │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
   Sylvester     │           │             │             │  Corps, April
                 │           │             │             │  30, '64.
 Ogden, Jas. H.  │Georgetown │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Died, Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green Dec. 11,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Preble, Thomas  │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out July
                 │           │             │             │  17, 1865.
 Parker, Thos. M.│Dallas     │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Killed at Kenesaw
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Rednour, John S.│Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Dec. 16,
                 │           │             │             │  '64;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Roberts, James  │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died, Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green Dec. 27.
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Rowland, Thos.  │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died, Danville,
   J.            │           │             │             │  Ky., Nov. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Rugg, Peter     │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Ridnour, Samuel │Georgetown │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 27,
                 │           │             │             │  '63, as Corp'l;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Swank, John W.  │Georgetown │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Sweeney, Joseph │Georgetown │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Shoemaker,      │Danville   │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 27,
   Sanford       │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Shearer,        │Danville   │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Disch. April 11,
   Josephus      │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Swank, R. H.    │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Sept. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Thompson, Abram │Georgetown │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 27,
   B.            │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Whitlock, Wm.   │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Disch. May 7,
                 │           │             │             │  1864;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Wallingsford,   │Georgetown │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Committed suicide
   Jas. E.       │           │             │             │  at Edgefield
                 │           │             │             │  Aug. 10, '63.
                 │           │             │             │  Supposed
                 │           │             │             │  insane.
 West, William   │Dallas     │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Corp'l. Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Chattanooga,
                 │           │             │             │  Aug. 3,'64;
                 │           │             │             │  wounds.
 Weer, Wm. R.    │Perryville │Aug. 22      │Sept. 3      │Disch. July 30,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Whitcomb, E. T. │Georgetown │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Oct. 24,
                 │           │             │             │  '64;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Hinton, Thomas  │Selma      │Sept. 13     │Sept. 13     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hughes, Jas. O. │Dallas     │             │             │Died at Nashville
                 │           │             │             │  July 22, '63.
 Moore, George   │Georgetown │Sept. 8, '63 │Sept. 8, '63 │Disch. Jan. 14,
                 │           │             │             │  '64;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Moore, Charles  │Georgetown │Nov. 18, '63 │Nov. 18, '63 │Trans. to Co. D,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                      ENLISTED MEN OF COMPANY "E."

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
      _First     │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
    Sergeant._   │           │             │             │
 Martin V. Stone │Champaign  │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Promoted 2d
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Sergeants._  │           │             │             │
 Thomas Poage    │Sidney     │Aug. 15      │    same     │Absent, sick, at
                 │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 George Scroggs  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │    same     │Promoted Sergeant
                 │           │             │             │  Major.
 G. W. B. Sadorus│Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │    same     │Promoted Captain.
 William Wilsey  │Champaign  │Aug. 6       │    same     │Disch. July 14,
                 │           │             │             │  '64, as
                 │           │             │             │  private;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 John F. Waters  │Champaign  │Aug. 6       │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as pvt.
 Eli S. Cook     │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │    same     │Died at Nashville
                 │           │             │             │  June 7, '64.
 Jas. H. Simpson │Champaign  │Aug. 7       │    same     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 James M. Story  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │    same     │Killed at Kenesaw
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 J. A. Harrison  │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │    same     │Died at home
                 │           │             │             │  March 2, 1863.
 William Humphrey│Sidney     │Aug. 19      │    same     │M. O. June 13,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Serg't.
 J. Frankenberg  │Champaign  │Aug. 4       │    same     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Geo. T.         │Sidney     │Aug. 15      │    same     │Disch. Aug. 20,
   Williamson    │           │             │             │  '64;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Musician._   │           │             │             │
 John Rowe       │Sadorus    │Aug. 15      │    same     │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Jan. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Privates._   │           │             │             │
 Ashby William   │Sidney     │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Disch. March 14,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Applegate,      │Champaign  │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Samuel        │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Burris, Wm. L.  │Sidney     │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Burns, Frank    │Champaign  │Aug. 19      │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick, at
                 │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Breese, Leonard │Champaign  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Deserted Oct. 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Boak, William   │Champaign  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Bates, Daniel W.│Danville   │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Died, Chattanooga
                 │           │             │             │  July 15, '64;
                 │           │             │             │  wounds.
 Cade, William   │Danville   │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Died, Nashville
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 21, 1862.
 Coble, John H.  │Danville   │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Custer, Thos. W.│Sidney     │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Campbell, Wm. N.│Champaign  │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Died, Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Dec 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Campbell, Jas.  │Champaign  │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Killed at
   O.            │           │             │             │  Bentonville, N.
                 │           │             │             │  C. March 19,
                 │           │             │             │  '65.
 Culbertson, Hugh│Champaign  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Darah, Samuel   │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Deer, Thomas    │Sidney     │Aug. 22      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Dooley, James   │Homer      │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Died. Big Shanty,
                 │           │             │             │  Ga., July 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '64; wounds.
 Ellers, James   │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Invalid
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Jan. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Fieg, John      │Champaign  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Discharged at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville,
                 │           │             │             │  Tenn.
 Gibson, William │Champaign  │Aug. 4       │Sept. 3      │Died in Georgia,
                 │           │             │             │  Sept. 2, 1864;
                 │           │             │             │  wounds.
 Gilmer,         │Champaign  │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv Corps,
   Alexander     │           │             │             │  Jan 5, 1864.
 Gill, John      │Champaign  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick, at
                 │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Harrison. Geo.  │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Must. out July 1,
   W.            │           │             │             │  '65; pris. war.
 Harper, Robt.   │Champaign  │Aug. 2       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 27,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Harlan, John    │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Johnson, Levi   │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865.
 Kendell, William│Champaign  │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. March 3,
                 │           │             │             │  '63:
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 King, Ransom B. │Sadorus    │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Laughlin, Moses │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   T.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Lewis, Thomas W.│Champaign  │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 LaCost, John    │Danville   │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Deserted Nov. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  1862.
 Linsey, George  │Sadorus    │Sept. 4      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Sept.
                 │           │             │             │  21, 1864.
 Monroe, Chas. B.│Champaign  │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corporal.
 McKean, Victor  │Champaign  │Aug. 1       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Mar. 14,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 McKinney, John  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Disch. May, 4,
   W.            │           │             │             │  '64;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Miller, John H. │Champaign  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Disch. July 8,
                 │           │             │             │  1863;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Myers, Geo. W.  │Danville   │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Miller, H. J.   │Sidney     │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died at Savannah
                 │           │             │             │  Jan. 15, '65.
 Pierce, Daniel  │Champaign  │Aug. 5       │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Jan. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Peabody, George │Champaign  │Aug. 6       │Sept. 3      │Disch. July 23,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Reed, Francis M.│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick, at
                 │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Ramsey, Hugh    │Champaign  │Aug. 2       │Sept. 3      │Died at Nashville
                 │           │             │             │  May 14, '63.
 Reynolds, T. M. │Champaign  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 2,
                 │           │             │             │  '65; was
                 │           │             │             │  prisoner.
 Ruckman. Geo. A.│Sidney     │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Stults, John    │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Mar. 8,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corporal;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Shervey, Henry  │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Apr. 20,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Silvers, William│Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Goldsboro, N.
                 │           │             │             │  C., April 5,
                 │           │             │             │  '65; wounds.
 Shafer, Philip  │Champaign  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Deserted Oct. 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1862.
 Stacker, James  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Disch Feb. 24,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Smith, Squire   │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Shue, Samuel    │Champaign  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Taff, Jas. L.   │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Serg.
 Taylor, George  │Sidney     │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Chattanooga,
                 │           │             │             │  Aug 2, '64;
                 │           │             │             │  wounds.
 Urquhart, Parden│Sadorus    │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 20,
                 │           │             │             │  '65; was pris.
 Williams, John  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Louisville Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  13, '63.
 Williamson,     │Sidney     │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   David         │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Wilson, Jacob   │Sidney     │Aug. 22      │Sept. 3      │Killed, Jonesboro
                 │           │             │             │  Sept. 1, '64.
 Weckmire,       │Sidney     │Aug. 4       │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick, at
   William       │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Wibley, William │Champaign  │Aug. 2       │Sept. 3      │Disch. May 18,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Williams William│Champaign  │Aug. 5       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Wilson, John    │Champaign  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Deserted Oct. 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1862.
 Welch, Joseph   │Champaign  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Mar. 22,
                 │           │             │             │  '65;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Whitfield, Lewis│Champaign  │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Yates, Samuel B.│Champaign  │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Yates, Louis    │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Jan. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
 York, Charles   │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Chattanooga
                 │           │             │             │  Dec. 9, '64.
 Young, M. M.    │Sadorus    │Aug. 19      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Jan. 6,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Danford, Nelson │Champaign  │             │             │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Latour, Henry   │Sadorus    │Aug. 12      │Aug. 12      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Jan. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
 Lindsey, Wm. L. │Danville   │Dec. 30, '63 │Dec. 30      │Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Chattanooga,
                 │           │             │             │  July 14, '64;
                 │           │             │             │  wounds.
 Roberts, John W.│Champaign  │             │             │Disch. Feb. 2,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Stults, Geo. A. │Champaign  │             │             │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Troy, Martin    │Danville   │             │             │Deserted Nov. 4,
                 │           │             │             │  1862.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                      ENLISTED MEN OF COMPANY "F."

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
      _First     │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
    Sergeant._   │           │             │             │
 William R. Shoup│Newcomb    │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Promoted 2d
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Sergeants._  │           │             │             │
 Joseph H. White │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 James Smith     │           │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Died at Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Dec. 19,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Hugh Mitchell   │           │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Royal A. Sizer  │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Bentonville, N.
                 │           │             │             │  C., Mar. 19,
                 │           │             │             │  '65.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Corporals._  │           │             │             │
 Henry M. Rudolph│East Bend  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Serg't.  Killed
                 │           │             │             │  at Kenesaw,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Hugh C. Minnix  │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Joseph Dickson  │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Joseph C.       │Newcomb    │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Died,
   Pancake       │           │             │             │  Harrodsburg,
                 │           │             │             │  Dec. 4, '62.
 James M. Johnson│Newcomb    │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as pvt.
 Thomas Chism    │           │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as pvt.
 James M. White  │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Nathan F.       │Newcomb    │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Trotter       │           │             │             │  9, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Privates._   │           │             │             │
 Abbott, Jordan  │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Absent, sick at
                 │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Ater, Zachariah │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Beasley, David  │Champaign  │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Promoted
   H.            │           │             │             │  Quartermaster
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Beaughman. A. J.│East Bend  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Brown, Stephen  │East Bend  │Aug.  11     │Sept. 3      │Disch. Mar. 20,
   C.            │           │             │             │  '64;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Champion, Lyman │Middleton  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
   E.            │           │             │             │  1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Christy, Richard│East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865.
 Chism, Jacob    │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865.
 Caldwell, John  │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Harrodsburg,
                 │           │             │             │  Oct. 30, '63.
 Coffman, Wm. E. │Newcomb    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Died, Bardstown,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 20, '62.
 Cole, Thompson  │East Bend  │Aug. 14      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 16,
                 │           │             │             │  '64;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Evans, Edward   │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Fenters, Eli    │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Fagan, Benj. B. │Newcomb    │Aug. 15      │Sept. 3      │Promoted Hospital
                 │           │             │             │  Steward.
 Fagan, Edwin    │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Fisher, John M. │Newcomb    │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Accidentally
                 │           │             │             │  killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Chickamauga
                 │           │             │             │  Sta., Nov. 26,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Fry, George     │Newcomb    │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Gross, Aaron    │East Bend  │Aug. 2       │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Sept 30,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Henderson,      │East Bend  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Feb.
   Parson        │           │             │             │  10, 1863.
 Herron, H. L.   │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Pris. war.
                 │           │             │             │  Captured Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  15, '64.
 Howard, G. W.   │East Bend  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Houston, A. J.  │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Houston, Benj.  │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hummell, Philip │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Irelan, Moses   │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Jackway, Geo. W.│Pilot      │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Transferred to
                 │           │             │             │  Co. I.
 Jeffries, James │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Jess, William   │Newcomb    │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Died of wounds
                 │           │             │             │  received at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Jennings,       │Newcomb    │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Died at
   William       │           │             │             │  Louisville, Dec
                 │           │             │             │  18, '63.
 Kirsh, John G.  │Pilot      │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Transferred to
                 │           │             │             │  Co. I.
 Kelly, Thomas   │Park co.,  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  23, 1865.
                 │Ind.       │             │             │
 Lesher, Isaac   │Newcomb    │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Lynch, Wm. F.   │Champaign  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Mavoney, Ithamas│East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Louisville,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 29, '64.
 Merrill, H. M.  │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Killed, Kenesaw,
                 │           │             │             │  June 30, '64.
 Myers, Frederick│East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out,
                 │           │             │             │  June 9, 1865.
 Myers, Henry    │Pilot      │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Discharged March
                 │           │             │             │  21, 1863.
 Mitchell, John  │Pilot      │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Miller, Josiah  │East Bend  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Miller, Alfred  │Newcomb    │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Nickelson,      │East Bend  │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Died at
   Charles       │           │             │             │  Nashville, Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  3, '63.
 Newell, John W. │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Eng.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Aug. 10,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Osburn,         │Newcomb    │Aug. 21      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Christian     │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Peofley,        │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Died at
   Jonathan      │           │             │             │  Louisville,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 12, '62.
 Perkins, Jas. L.│Middleton  │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Pugh, Marshall  │East Bend  │Aug. 10      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Rowen, Philip   │Newcomb    │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Robbins, A. B.  │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Corp'l. Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Rome, Ga., May
                 │           │             │             │  30, '64.
 Rowe, Wm. S.    │East Bend  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Discharged June
                 │           │             │             │  4, 1863.
 Randolph, Chas. │Newcomb    │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   W.            │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Snell, Clark B. │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Transferred to
                 │           │             │             │  Co. I.
 Stephenson, S.  │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   G.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Stout, James    │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Showalter,      │Newcomb    │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Jonathan      │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Strouss, David  │Newcomb    │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Scott, Edwin    │Newcomb    │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Harrodsburg,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 25, '62.
 Taylor, John Q. │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Dec. 13,
                 │           │             │             │  '64 as Corp'l;
                 │           │             │             │  wounds.
 Vangordon, D. S.│East Bend  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Warfield,       │East Bend  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Died at
   Richard       │           │             │             │  Nashville, Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  12, '62.
 Waugh, David    │Champaign  │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Apr.
                 │           │             │             │  12, '63.
 Weaver, W. B.   │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │M. O. May 15,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Corp'l.
 Weaver, Hiram D.│Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out July
                 │           │             │             │  4, 1865.
 White, John J.  │Newcomb    │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Promoted 2d
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
 Whitney, Jas. L.│Newcomb    │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Feb. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
 Woolsey, Alonza │East Bend  │Aug. 9       │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   A.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Woodcock, James │East Bend  │Aug. 7       │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Sept.
                 │           │             │             │  30, '63.
 Williams,       │East Bend  │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Richard       │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Barton, J. N.   │Newcomb    │Feb. 2, '64  │Feb. 2, 1864 │Tr. to Co. A,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Barton, Stephen │Newcomb    │Feb. 2, '61  │Feb. 2, 1864 │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Campbell, Thos. │Middleton  │Nov 17, '63  │Nov. 17, '63 │Tr. to Co. A,
   J.            │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Fenters, Samuel │Middleton  │Nov. 17, '63 │Nov. 17, '63 │Tr. to Co. A,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Fetty, Newton   │Newcomb    │Aug. 3, '63  │Sept. 4, '63 │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hites, Jas. O.  │Middleton  │Nov. 17, '63 │Nov. 17, '63 │Tr. to Inv. Corps
   K.            │           │             │             │  Nov. 17, '64.
 Jess, Thomas    │Middleton  │Dec. 2, '63  │Dec. 4, '63  │Disch. Feb. 21,
                 │           │             │             │  '65; wounds.
 Latter,         │Middleton  │Dec. 2, '63  │Dec. 4, '63  │Tr. to Co. A,
   Alexander     │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Osburn,         │Rantoul    │Nov. 17, '63 │Nov. 17, '63 │Tr. to Co. A,
   Christian     │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Ray, John S.    │Newcomb    │Mar. 30, '64 │Mar. 30, '64 │Tr. to Co. A,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Stout. Martin   │Middleton  │Nov. 17, '63 │Nov. 17, '63 │Tr. to Co. A,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Woodcock, John  │Cairo      │Dec. 3, '63  │Dec. 3, '63  │Tr. to Co. A,
   L.            │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                      ENLISTED MEN OF COMPANY "G".

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
   _Sergeants._  │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
 Newton Norris   │Danville   │Aug. 11      │Sept. 3.     │Promoted 2d
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
 A. A. Sulcer    │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Promoted Hospital
                 │           │             │             │  Steward.
 Henry Cotten    │Georgetown │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  14, 1863.
 Elisha Littler  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Promoted 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
 William Hart    │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville,
                 │           │             │             │  April 2, '63.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Corporals._  │           │             │             │
 Franklin Guymond│Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Deserted at
                 │           │             │             │  Louisville, Ky.
 Wm. Hawkins     │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Serg't.
 Samuel Zortman  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Serg't. Killed,
                 │           │             │             │  Marietta, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Marion Lee      │Fairmount  │Aug. 11      │    same     │Promoted 2d
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
 John Todd       │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Serg't Killed,
                 │           │             │             │  Marietta, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Joseph          │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 22,
   Buckingham    │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Jeptha K. Turner│Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged.
 Franklin        │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 13,
   McKinsey      │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  private.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Musicians._  │           │             │             │
 Joseph Ship     │Fairmount  │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville.
 Joseph Crosby   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Nov.
                 │           │             │             │  15, 1862.
                 │           │             │             │
    _Wagoner._   │           │             │             │
 Andrew C.       │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
   Hignett       │           │             │             │  9, '65.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Privates._   │           │             │             │
 Burgoyne, Jas.  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
   H.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Bently, Thomas  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged March
                 │           │             │             │  17, 1864.
 Boggest, H. M.  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  22, '62.
 Culp, Marion    │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged March
                 │           │             │             │  7, 1863.
 Clayton, J. J.  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Culp, J. D.     │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865.
 Clearwater,     │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Feb.
   Richard       │           │             │             │  23, 1863.
 Davidson, John  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged at
   G.            │           │             │             │  Nashville.
 Darlin, Alphias │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Darlin, E. P.   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  11, 1863.
 Eacret, Samuel  │Danville   │Aug. 11      │    same     │Tr. to Inv. Corps
                 │           │             │             │  Oct. 29, '63.
 Evans, T. L. H. │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Tr. to Inv. Corps
                 │           │             │             │  Oct. 29, '63.
 Flougher,       │Fairmount  │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 9,
   William       │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Felmley, William│Pilot      │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Corp'l.
 Gee, Mathias    │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865.
 Griffith, Samuel│Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died, Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 16, '62.
 Harness, Joshua │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Corp'l.
 Herring, Henry  │Danville   │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Nov.
                 │           │             │             │  6, 1862.
 Herring, Elisha │Pilot      │Aug. 11      │    same     │Killed near
                 │           │             │             │  Marietta, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Hall, Marvin C. │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  5, 1862.
 Keeny, Thos. A. │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Perryville,
                 │           │             │             │  Oct. 8, 1862.
 Keeny, Jas. W.  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged March
                 │           │             │             │  7, 1863.
 Lyman, Warren   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Killed near
                 │           │             │             │  Marietta, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, 64.
 Lenover, John   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Sept.
                 │           │             │             │  16, '63.
 Littler, Cyrus  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
   R.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Leaky, Geo. M.  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Loman, James    │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died, Nashville,
                 │           │             │             │  March 23, '63.
 Lasew, William  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  23, 1865.
 Lyman, Jonathan │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Sept.
                 │           │             │             │  16, '63.
 Lloyd, Henry    │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Littler, John   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Killed, Marietta,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Littler, Edwin  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died, Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 25, '62.
 McHenry, Timothy│Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died, Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 6, '62.
 Neel Jacob N.   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Killed near
                 │           │             │             │  Marietta, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Nire, Adam      │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville.
 Ogle, Francis M.│Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  15, 1865.
 O'Neal, Thomas  │Danville   │Aug.  11     │Sept. 3      │Killed near
                 │           │             │             │  Marietta, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Ogden, Jos. C.  │Danville   │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Ogden, Jas. F.  │Danville   │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  22, 1865.
 Oflett, Gabriel │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Louisville Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  30, '62.
 Piper, Wm. H.   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  12, 1862.
 Parker, Charles │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Parker, Robert  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Pate, Lazarus N.│Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Reynolds, John  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Feb.
   W.            │           │             │             │  12, 1863.
 Swoap, B. F.    │Danville   │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  1, '62.
 Shephard, M. B. │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  15, 1863.
 Stansbury, Amos │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Spangler, Wm.   │Danville   │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Smith, John D.  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Jonesboro,
                 │           │             │             │  Sept. 1, '64.
 Sullivan,       │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died Chattanooga,
   Patrick       │           │             │             │  July 26, '64.
 Stearns, John H.│Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Deserted Dec. 5,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Scott, William  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Trans. to Pioneer
                 │           │             │             │  Corps.
 Smith, John N.  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Oct.
                 │           │             │             │  23, 1862.
 Snider, William │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville.
 Swain, Samuel   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Killed, Marietta,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Swain, Marion   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Stobangh,       │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Deserted at
   Alexander     │           │             │             │  Louisville, Ky.
 Sampson, H. R.  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Deserted at
                 │           │             │             │  Louisville, Ky.
 Tanner, Isaac   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. July 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '65; was pris.
 Tash, Jesse     │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  17, 1862.
 Thorp, Joseph C.│Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M.O. June 9, '65,
                 │           │             │             │  as Corp'l.
 Worden, Henry   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Serg't.
 Williams, A. J. │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Killed, Marietta,
                 │           │             │             │  June 27, '64.
 Wright, Edward  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Williams,       │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Dec.
   William       │           │             │             │  12, 1862.
 Williams, David │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  18, 1863.
 Wilson, Benj.   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died March 27,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Wilson, James   │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Discharged Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  12, 1862.
 Walker. Isaiah  │Catlin     │Aug. 11      │    same     │Died Chattanooga,
   G.            │           │             │             │  Jan. 11, '64.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Love, William   │Catlin     │             │             │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  6, 1863.
 Puzey, Thomas   │Catlin     │Dec. 19, '63 │Dec. 19, '63 │Trans, to Co. G,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Simpson, John   │Catlin     │Aug. 11, '62 │Sept. 4, '62 │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865, as 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Turner, James   │Vermilion  │Mar. 8, '64  │Mar. 8, '64  │Trans. to Co. G.
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                      ENLISTED MEN OF COMPANY "H."

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
      _First     │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
    Sergeant._   │           │             │             │
 John W. Hill    │           │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │
                 │           │             │             │
   _Sergeants._  │           │             │             │
 Samuel M.       │Urbana     │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Promoted 2d
   Dunseth       │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
 Augustine       │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Killed at
   Blacker       │           │             │             │  Jonesboro, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  Sept. 1, '64.
 William Padgett │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Died June 16,
                 │           │             │             │  1864; wounds.
 John F. Sims    │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Discharged March
                 │           │             │             │  20, 1863.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Corporals._  │           │             │             │
 Stephen C Abbott│Middletown │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Disch. Jan. 4,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Benj. F. Wingard│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │M. O. May 13,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  private.
 Adam Harper     │Piatt Co.  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Serg't.
 Highland F.     │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Captured May 21,
   Hewes         │           │             │             │  1864.
 Ephriam J. Scott│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Died in prison
                 │           │             │             │  hospital,
                 │           │             │             │  Atlanta, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  July 3, 1864.
 Isaac J. Coon   │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Must. out June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Serg't.
 James B. Ray    │Middletown │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Died Sept. 22,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
 Bernard G. Parks│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Promoted
                 │           │             │             │  Commissary
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Privates._   │           │             │             │
 Acree, Joseph W.│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Must'd out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65 as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Alvis, Joseph   │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept. 3      │Died Feb. 2,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Blue, John W.   │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Discharged Oct.
                 │           │             │             │  23, 1862.
 Black, Peter    │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Brown, James    │Middletown │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Baker, John     │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Died in
                 │           │             │             │  Andersonville
                 │           │             │             │  prison Jan. 26,
                 │           │             │             │  1865. No. of
                 │           │             │             │  grave, 12,530.
 Burnett, Seth L.│Middletown │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Bond, Blackburn │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Carter, John    │Middletown │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  24, '65;
                 │           │             │             │  disabil.
 Cappis, William │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │M. O. July 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '65; was pris.
 Coon, M. H.     │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Crabtree, Peter │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Disch. on or
                 │           │             │             │  about Feb. 14,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Curtis, Alvin F.│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Conter, Elisha  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Discharged July
   W.            │           │             │             │  29, 1863.
 Case, Charles   │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Cannon, Jas. W. │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Transferred to
                 │           │             │             │  Co. I.
 Coon, Joseph    │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Coon, Thomas    │Vermilion  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Discharged Aug.
                 │           │             │             │  30, 1863.
 Coon, Peter     │McDonough  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  22, 1863.
 Coon, Henry     │DeWitt     │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Discharged Oct.
                 │           │             │             │  23, 1862.
 Campbell, John  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Deserted Dec. 4,
                 │           │             │             │  1862.
 Davidson, H. W. │Middletown │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Corp'l.
 Davis, Wm. I.   │Piatt Co.  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Captured Nov. 30,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
 Downs, Noble    │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Dickson, Andrew │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │M. O June 9, '65,
                 │           │             │             │  as Corporal.
                 │           │             │             │  Absent, sick.
 Davis, Edward   │Piatt Co.  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Danforth, Nelson│Piatt Co.  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │See Recruits Co.
                 │           │             │             │  E.
 Ensminger, Saml │Piatt Co.  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Edwards, H. T.  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  14, 1863.
 England, Albert │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │
 Gulick, James P.│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Gordon, B. F.   │Piatt Co.  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hughes, David F.│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Died in
                 │           │             │             │  Andersonville
                 │           │             │             │  prison, Sept.
                 │           │             │             │  28, 1864. No.
                 │           │             │             │  of grave,
                 │           │             │             │  9,962.
 Hard, R. F.     │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Hadfield, Joseph│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, July
                 │           │             │             │  1, '64.
 Johnston, John  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Died in
                 │           │             │             │  Andersonville
                 │           │             │             │  prison, Apr.
                 │           │             │             │  21, 1864. No.
                 │           │             │             │  of grave,
                 │           │             │             │  9,458.
 Johnston,       │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
   Richard       │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Knapp, Thos. J. │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp.
 King, Granville │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
   C.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 King, David     │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  28, '63.
 King, Isaiah J. │Edgar Co.  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Captured near
                 │           │             │             │  Dallas, Ga.
 Kesler, Joseph  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Died Dec. 7,
                 │           │             │             │  1862.
 Kaffer, Peter   │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Must'd out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Laughlin, Samuel│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Must'd out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, as 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Luman, Surl L.  │Middletown │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Means, William  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Died of w'ds
                 │           │             │             │  rec'd Sept. 22,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Morris, John D. │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │
 Mallory, George │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Minnear, Elias  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Disch. on or
                 │           │             │             │  about Feb. 14,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 McCall, W. H. H.│Middletown │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Mortimore, S. C.│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Deserted Feb. 2,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 McMahan, W. M.  │Middletown │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Disch. on or
                 │           │             │             │  about June 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Mahlone, S. E.  │Piatt Co.  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  10, '63.
 Manford, John   │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Transferred to V.
                 │           │             │             │  R. C.
 Purtle, John    │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Disch. Feb. 2,
                 │           │             │             │  '65;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Pitman, Dubois  │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Missing at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  since June 27,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
 Phillips, James │Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out May
                 │           │             │             │  26, 1865.
 Polston, Jacob  │Vermilion  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │M. O. July 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '65; was
                 │           │             │             │  prisoner.
 Polston, John   │Vermilion  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Polston, William│Champaign  │Aug. 8       │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Robinson,       │Piatt Co.  │Aug.  8      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   William       │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Smith, John     │Champaign  │Aug.  8      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Smith, Oliver H.│Champaign  │Aug.  8      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Tryon, Harvey S.│Champaign  │Aug.  8      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Vest, Samuel    │Middletown │Aug.  8      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Waterman, Henry │Champaign  │Aug.  8      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Waterman,       │Champaign  │Aug.  8      │    same     │Discharged March
   Theodore      │           │             │             │  24, 1864.
 Wright, George  │Champaign  │Aug.  8      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Wright, William │Champaign  │Aug.  8      │    same     │Died of
                 │           │             │             │  accidental w'ds
                 │           │             │             │  in '62.
 Weston, N.      │           │Aug.  8      │    same     │
 Williams, Daniel│Champaign  │Aug.  8      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Hardin, Albert  │           │             │             │Died at Bowling
   G.            │           │             │             │  Green, Ky., in
                 │           │             │             │  1862.
 McCormick, J. H.│Chicago    │Oct.  8 '64  │Oct. 8, '64  │Trans. to Co. H,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                      ENLISTED MEN OF COMPANY "I."

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
      _First     │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
    Sergeant._   │           │             │             │
 Jas. H. Trimmel │Pilot      │Aug.  12     │Sept.  3     │Promoted 2d
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant
                 │           │             │             │
   _Sergeants._  │           │             │             │
 Alfred Atwood   │Pilot      │Aug. 15      │Sept.  3     │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65, 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Serg.
 Samuel Hardisty │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Disch. Mar. 19,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Geo. A. Clapp   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Promoted 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant
 Daniel Gibson   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Edgefield, Nov.
                 │           │             │             │  25, '62
                 │           │             │             │
   _Corporals._  │           │             │             │
 George Young    │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Died, Louisville,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 29, '62
 Levi W. Coughton│Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as private
 Henry Armentrout│Pilot      │Aug. 15      │Sept.  3     │Disch. Feb. 4,
                 │           │             │             │  '63; disability
 Barton Snider   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Jarrett Davis   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant
 Thos. Mackemson │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant
 Robert Michael  │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64
 Daniel D. Cannon│Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as private
                 │           │             │             │
   _Musician._   │           │             │             │
 Curtis H. Tanzey│Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Promoted
                 │           │             │             │  Principal
                 │           │             │             │  Musician
 Milton C. Cannon│Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Corp'l.
                 │           │             │             │
    _Wagoner._   │           │             │             │
 Daniel B.       │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Disch. Oct. 24,
   Sanders       │           │             │             │  '62; disability
                 │           │             │             │
   _Privates._   │           │             │             │
 Acton, David A. │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65
 Alton, Preston  │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Acton, John W.  │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Died, Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Dec. 2, '62.
 Alexander, W. W.│Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Disch. Feb. 3,
                 │           │             │             │  '63; disability
 Blevins, Geo. W.│Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Burd, Wm. F.    │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Serg't.
 Brown, Jacob    │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │M. O. June 17,
                 │           │             │             │  1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Burd, Adrian P. │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Babb, Gideon    │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Tr. to Eng.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, July 29,
                 │           │             │             │  '64
 Brittingham, A. │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
   W.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Cosairt, John   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Edgefield, July
                 │           │             │             │  28, '63
 Carmack, John   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Corp'l. Killed,
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Cannon, John T. │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Dancer, Elias F.│Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1863
 Dove, Abram C.  │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Durham, Samuel  │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Disch. July 18,
                 │           │             │             │  '63; disability
 Disert, Joseph  │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Tr. to Eng.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, July 29,
                 │           │             │             │  '64
 Dare, Philip H. │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Elkins, Stephen │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Harrodsburg,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 11, '62
 Gilliland,      │Blount     │Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Mustered out June
   Reason        │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Hewitt, Eli M.  │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept.  3     │Disch. for
                 │           │             │             │  promotion, Mar.
                 │           │             │             │  23, '64
 Hardisty, N. W. │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Mar. 7,
                 │           │             │             │  '65;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Huston, John    │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865
 Hillary, Jas. P.│Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Feb. 25,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Hillary, Francis│Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. May 6,
   J.            │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Hardisty, A. S. │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. June 19,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Hollett, Hiram  │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hughes, Isaac   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hoboy, Eisha    │Blount     │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Howard, John W. │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg.
 Herring, John   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Hannahs, Thomas │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Holeman, I. H.  │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Jones, Harlin   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Kane, Matthew   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Liggett, Lawson │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. May 31,
                 │           │             │             │  '65;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Liggett, Nelson │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, June 21,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Lourance,       │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Whitacher     │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Lourance, Jonas │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Lane, William   │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Laflin, Amos W. │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Masters, Jacob  │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   F. S. T.      │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Miller, Jas. W. │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Moody, Joseph   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Oct. 24,
                 │           │             │             │  '62;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Mauslar, J. W.  │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Miller, John    │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  30, 1865.
 Madole, William │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Odey, Newton    │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Osborn, Uriah   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Sept.
                 │           │             │             │  16, '63.
 Parnell, John W.│Blount     │Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Nov. 10,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Pilkinton,      │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Charles       │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Rutledge, Isaac │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Paroled pris.
   S.            │           │             │             │  Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Annapolis, Md.,
                 │           │             │             │  March 10, 1865.
 Rowe, John      │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Rees, Wm. M.    │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Died at Atlanta,
                 │           │             │             │  Sept. 23, '64.
 Starr, Peter L. │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  12, 1862.
 Sanders, Newton │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Sanders, Levi W.│Middle Fork│Aug. 15      │    same     │Promoted
                 │           │             │             │  Chaplain.
 Smoot, Nathan J.│Danville   │Sept. 3      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Taber, Jesse    │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │    same     │Died, Gallatin,
                 │           │             │             │  Jan. 23, 1863.
 Vansandt, H. G. │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │    same     │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Waugh, William  │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │    same     │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Louisville,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 5, 1862.
 West, William   │Pilot      │Aug. 12      │    same     │Died, Bowling
                 │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Jan. 7, '63.
 Wilson, John G. │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │    same     │Died at Big
                 │           │             │             │  Shanty, Ga.,
                 │           │             │             │  June 29, '64;
                 │           │             │             │  wounds.
 Walker, Andrew  │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │    same     │Mustered out May
                 │           │             │             │  20, 1865.
 Waugh, David W. │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │    same     │Died, Danville,
                 │           │             │             │  Ky., Nov. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Waugh, Vains    │Middle Fork│Aug. 12      │    same     │Supposed disch.
                 │           │             │             │  and re-enlisted
                 │           │             │             │  in 86th Ind.
                 │           │             │             │  Vols.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Ballard, Josiah │Middle Fork│Dec. 15, '63 │Dec. 15, '63 │Died at Camp
                 │           │             │             │  McAfee Church,
                 │           │             │             │  Ga., Feb. 6,
                 │           │             │             │  1864.
 Ballard, Henry  │Middle Fork│Dec. 15, '63 │Dec. 15, '63 │Trans. to Co. I,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Cannon, James W.│           │             │             │Absent, sick, at
                 │           │             │             │  M. O. of Reg't.
 Clark, W. W.    │Middle Fork│             │             │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 French, Louis T.│Middle Fork│Mar. 7, '64  │Mar. 12, '64 │Trans. to Co. I,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Harper, B. F.   │Middle Fork│             │             │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  28, '64.
 Jackney, Geo. W.│           │             │             │Disch. Feb. 27,
                 │           │             │             │  '63;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Kirsh, John G.  │           │             │             │Must'd out July
                 │           │             │             │  1, '65; was
                 │           │             │             │  pris.
 Kirkhart,       │Blue Grass │Dec. 22, '63 │Dec. 22, '63 │Died Chattanooga,
   Michael       │           │             │             │  July 15, '64.
 Liggett, John   │Middle Fork│Dec. 15, '63 │Dec. 15,  '63│Trans. to Co. I,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Moore, James    │Catlin     │Dec. 29, '63 │Dec. 29, '63 │Trans. to Co. I,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Snell, Clark B. │           │             │             │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Tansey, Verlin  │Quincy     │Feb. 23, '64 │Feb. 23, '64 │Disch. Feb. 20,
   G.            │           │             │             │  '65;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 Watson, Milton  │Pilot      │             │             │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                      ENLISTED MEN OF COMPANY "K."

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
   _Sergeants._  │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
 Ezekiel B.      │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged July
   Timmon        │           │             │             │  17, 1863.
 Wiliam B. Galway│Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Promoted 2d
                 │           │             │             │  Lieutenant.
 Peter S. Burk   │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to regular
                 │           │             │             │  army. Dec. 16,
                 │           │             │             │  '62.
 Isaac N. Adams  │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Chattanooga,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 4, '64;
                 │           │             │             │  wounds.
 Thomas Guthrie  │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Disch. July 13,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Corporals._  │           │             │             │
 James M. Cook   │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as 1st
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 Thos. L. Douglas│Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65.
 Wm. M. Marity   │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged April
                 │           │             │             │  10, '65 w'ds.
 A. J. Woolcot   │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 David M. Woolen │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Nov. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '63. M. O.
                 │           │             │             │  April 13, '65;
                 │           │             │             │  disability.
 T. A. Baker     │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 William Jamison │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as
                 │           │             │             │  Sergeant.
 Thos. W.        │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Serg't. Promoted
   Blakeney      │           │             │             │  Serg't Major.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Musicians._  │           │             │             │
 Eli Shephard    │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Nov. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Saml. R. Tilton │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Privates._   │           │             │             │
 Anderson, Joseph│Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Argo, Wm. J.    │St. Joseph │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Bell, John V.   │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Blakney, Jas. W.│Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Boon, Wm. J.    │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Disch. May 4,
                 │           │             │             │  1865; wounds.
 Barnard, John   │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Brown, John     │Vermilion  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Dec.
                 │           │             │             │  7, '62.
 Barnett,        │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   Thompson      │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Crosby, S. J.   │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Oct.
                 │           │             │             │  17, 1862.
 Cabbage, John   │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Cole, Commodore │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to reg. army,
   P.            │           │             │             │  Dec. 10, 1862.
 Conover, John R.│Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out May
                 │           │             │             │  26, 1865.
 Denton, John    │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Davidson, John  │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died, Bowling
   S.            │           │             │             │  Green, Ky.,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 20, '62.
 Dowers,         │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died at
   Washington    │           │             │             │  Chattanooga,
                 │           │             │             │  July 6, '64;
                 │           │             │             │  wounds.
 Elsby, Nehemiah │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Evans, Jesse A. │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Evans, Strader  │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Earls, Mordicai │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Foster, A. M.   │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  15, '64; w'ds.
 Fields, Thos. S.│Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Gibson, Philip  │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
   M.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Gibson, James   │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. July 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '65; was
                 │           │             │             │  prisoner.
 Guthrie Geo.    │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Gibson, Abyram  │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Gibson, Garrett │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Henson, W. P.   │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Nov. 29,
                 │           │             │             │  '62; wounds.
 Harrison, W. M. │Perryville │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died at Gallatin,
                 │           │             │             │  Jan. 13, '63.
 Hoyle, James    │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, June
                 │           │             │             │  8, '63.
 Herald, V. G.   │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Hildreth, Alvin │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Holt, Wm. H.    │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Jumps, Theodore │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Jumps, John W.  │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Jeffersonville,
                 │           │             │             │  Oct. 4, '64.
 Kiger, Charles  │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Kiger, Henry    │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Kelly, Jas. N.  │Rockville  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Disch. Mar. 14,
                 │           │             │             │  '65; wounds.
 Leach, Geo. T.  │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Vet. Eng.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps.
 Leach, Henry C. │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 McCartney,      │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Oct.
   Isaiah        │           │             │             │  18, 1862.
 Martin, Wm. H.  │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died,
                 │           │             │             │  Chattanooga,
                 │           │             │             │  July 26, '64;
                 │           │             │             │  wounds.
 McCorkle, N. M. │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Trans. to I. C.,
                 │           │             │             │  Nov. 1, 1863.
 Miller, Andrew  │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 McMillen, J. G. │Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 McMillen, George│Danville   │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Mitchels, Jasper│Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Mills, Richard  │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, '65.
 Mills, Adam H.  │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Killed at
                 │           │             │             │  Kenesaw, June
                 │           │             │             │  27, '64.
 Orr, Wm. W.     │Bloom      │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died, Big Shanty,
                 │           │             │             │  Ga., June 28,
                 │           │             │             │  '64; wounds.
 Ogden, William  │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 O'Bryant, W. W. │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865.
 O'Bryant,       │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
   Asberry       │           │             │             │  1865.
 Pettis, John    │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Deserted Nov. 6,
                 │           │             │             │  1862
 Porter, Henry S.│Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Corp'l.
 Richardson, R.  │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Oct
   T.            │           │             │             │  27, 1862.
 Rogers, John A. │Perryville │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Ramsey, Joseph  │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Deserted Aug. 7,
                 │           │             │             │  '64.
 Ritter, John    │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Oct.
                 │           │             │             │  18, 1862.
 Spry, J. W.     │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Spicer, William │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Died at Gallatin,
                 │           │             │             │  Dec. 25, 1862.
 Shewman, F. N.  │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Stunkard, W. N. │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Studley, H. H.  │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to V. R. C.,
                 │           │             │             │  May 1, 1864.
 Scott, Thos. W. │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Tabor, Alfred   │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  28, 1863.
 Thornton, J.    │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  '65, as Corp'l.
 Trosper, James  │Georgetown │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Tr. to Inv.
                 │           │             │             │  Corps, Nov. 1,
                 │           │             │             │  '63.
 Thornton, David │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Feb.
                 │           │             │             │  20, 1863.
 Thomas, W. H.   │Dallas     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │M. O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865, as
                 │           │             │             │  Serg't.
 White, William  │Catlin     │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Oct.
                 │           │             │             │  23, 1862.
 Whitehead, W. M.│Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Wilson, Jesse   │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 White, Jas. R.  │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Mustered out June
                 │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 West, Benj. F.  │Indianola  │Aug. 13      │Sept. 3      │Discharged Jan.
                 │           │             │             │  30, 1863.
                 │           │             │             │
   _Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Bishop, Austin  │Georgetown │             │             │Mustered out June
   B.            │           │             │             │  9, 1865.
 Hinson, Franklin│Collier    │Mar. 30, '64 │Mar. 30, '64 │Tr. to Co. K,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Jenkins, Eli    │Catlin     │Mar. 20, '64 │Mar. 29, '64 │Tr. to Co. K,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Jenkins, W. F.  │Springfield│Feb. 23, '64 │Feb. 23, '64 │Tr. to Co. K,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 McMullen, W. M. │Middle Fork│Dec. 29, '63 │Dec. 29. '63 │Trans. to Co. K,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 McNutt, Joseph  │Dallas     │             │             │Deserted April —,
                 │           │             │             │  1863.
 Nicholson, John │Danville   │Feb. 19, '64 │Feb. 19, '64 │Tr. to Co. K,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Richardson, S.  │Catlin     │Dec. 29, '63 │Dec. 29, '63 │Tr. to Co. K,
   F.            │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 Rotroff, Thomas │Indianola  │             │             │Died at
                 │           │             │             │  Nashville, Nov.
                 │           │             │             │  27, '62.
 Stewart, H. J.  │           │             │             │Reduced from
                 │           │             │             │  Commissary
                 │           │             │             │  Serg. at his
                 │           │             │             │  own request. M.
                 │           │             │             │  O. June 9,
                 │           │             │             │  1865.
 Sheuman, R. W.  │Georgetown │Feb. 19, '64 │Feb. 19, '64 │Trans. to Co. K,
                 │           │             │             │  60th Ill. Inf.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                          UNASSIGNED RECRUITS.

 ────────────────┬───────────┬─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────────────
  Name and Rank. │Residence. │   Date of   │   Date of   │    Remarks.
                 │           │ enlistment. │   muster.   │
 ────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────────
   _Unassigned   │           │    1862.    │    1862.    │
    Recruits._   │           │             │             │
 Gray, Joseph    │Middle Fork│Dec. 29, '63 │Dec. 29, '63 │
 Glandon,        │Middle Fork│Dec. 15, '63 │Dec. 15, '63 │Died Camp Butler,
   Sterling      │           │             │             │  Feb. 12, 64.
 ────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────────────


                             INTRODUCTORY.

Believing it would prove interesting and profitable to all the old
members of the 125th, we have concluded to append the official reports
of the brigade since the beginning of the Atlanta campaign; and the fact
that they were made by the only surviving field officer of the regiment,
who, as lieutenant colonel, commanded the brigade through more than ten
months of its greatest perils, will not, we feel very sure, detract from
their interest.

By the opening of the campaign, the regiment and brigade were very
nearly rid of their weakly men and inefficient officers, and were well
prepared to engage in the arduous duties before them.

Prior to the spring of '64, the whole brigade was largely in the school
of preparation, but from that time forward, always in the field of labor
and danger.

It must be remembered that official reports are limited to the recital
of acts done by the whole body, or some portion of it, in obedience to
orders, or the general plan of operations, and a description of the
performance of such acts, but the commander may not, like the
independent historian, indulge in generalities, individual opinion and
criticism, or extended personal mention. This difference will be more
apparent when the reader compares the reports with the author's accounts
of the same subject matter.

With this introduction, we present the official reports of our most
important campaigns.


               BRIGADE REPORT FROM LEE AND GORDON'S MILLS
                            TO ATLANTA, GA.

                     Headquarters 3rd Brigade, 2nd Division, 14th A. C.,
                                          Atlanta, Ga., Sept. 9th, 1864.

Captain: Pursuant to directions from division headquarters, of date the
6th instant, I have the honor to report, so far as my information
extends substantially, the operations of this brigade from the 3rd day
of May, 1864, when it struck tents and broke camp at Lee and Gordon's
mills, until its arrival at Atlanta on the 4th day of the present month.
Being the fourth brigade commander since the campaign began, and having
served on the corps staff for some time before, and up to, the 27th day
of June last, I am compelled to rely largely for data, upon the
necessarily confused memoranda of the different commanders who preceded
me.

On the 3rd day of May last, the brigade, comprising the 22nd Ind. Vet.
Vols., 85th, 86th, 110th and 125th Ills. Vols., and the 52nd Ohio Vols.,
commanded by Col. Dan. McCook, left Lee and Gordon's mills and marched
to Ringgold, Ga., where, toward night, it crossed the Chickamauga river
and joined the division commanded by Brig. Gen. J. C. Davis, and
bivouacked until the morning of the 5th of May, when it marched out to
near Catoosa Springs and encamped until the morning of the 7th, when it
marched beyond Tunnel Hill about two miles, part of the time under heavy
fire from the enemy's artillery. On the morning of the 8th of May, the
brigade marched towards and confronted the enemy's skirmishers guarding
the entrance to Buzzard Roost Gap. May 9th, supported the 1st brigade
skirmish line. May 10th, the brigade lay under fire from the enemy's
sharp-shooters until evening, when it moved to the front, and relieved
the 1st brigade, with the 52nd Ohio deployed as skirmishers. May 11th,
remained on the line until dark, at which time we were relieved by a
brigade of the 4th corps, and moved up the valley about two miles and
bivouacked for the night. May 13th, at day break the brigade with the
division marched toward Resaca by way of Snake Creek Gap, reaching the
mouth of the Gap, after a tiresome march, at about 8 o'clock p. m.;
continued the march until nearly 2 o'clock a. m. next day, when the
command halted until daylight, took breakfast and moved beyond the line
of intrenchments towards Resaca, where it rested until evening. Took up
position at night in rear of 1st division, 14th corps. Moved into line
next day, and confronted the enemy in his works at Resaca. Remained thus
until the enemy evacuated that place, when this brigade with the
division was ordered to Rome. The march commenced early, the 3rd brigade
in rear, with the 125th Ills. detailed as guards for the division train;
went into camp on the left of the Rome road. The brigade resumed the
march on the next morning at daylight, following the 2nd brigade, and
arrived within two miles of Rome at 5 o'clock p. m., where the enemy was
reported to be in his works in full force. Col. McCook immediately
disposed the brigade in order of battle as follows: the 22nd Ind. and
the 86th Ills., as front line, the 52nd Ohio and 85th Ills., as second
line, with three companies from the 22nd Ind. thrown forward as
skirmishers. The front line occupied an elevation of ground known as
Howe's Hill, with the left resting near Howe's house. The lines were but
just formed, when the enemy made a vigorous attack upon the 22nd Ind.,
throwing it into some confusion, and forcing its right back about sixty
yards, where it rallied behind a rail fence. A part of the 86th Ills.,
in the mean time, was pouring a well directed fire from its right, into
the enemies advancing lines. This had the effect to check them; at the
same time the 52nd Ohio advanced and relieved the 22nd Ind. By this time
it became so dark that but little could be discovered of what was going
on, but by continuously advancing the skirmish line, it was soon
ascertained that the enemy had retreated to his main works. To be
prepared for an attack in the morning, a light line of works was
constructed, but was not needed, for during the night the enemy
evacuated his intrenched position, and moved across the Ostenaula river,
burning the bridges after him. On the morning of May 18th, the 85th
Ills. crossed on the floating _debris_ of the bridge, and occupied the
city of Rome. On the following day the entire brigade crossed on newly
constructed pontoons, and encamped in the suburbs of the town, where it
remained doing various duties until the morning of the 24th of May, when
the brigade, with the division, marched toward Dallas, reaching the
latter place about noon, May 26th, and took up position about one half
mile to the left of town, where if remained until the next morning, when
it moved with the division to the mouth of —— Gap. Here the brigade was
placed in single line, with the 125th Ills. deployed as skirmishers. At
about 10 o'clock on the night of the 27th of May, the enemy attacked the
skirmish line and captured one commissioned officer and fourteen
enlisted men, when a counter charge was made which resulted in the
capture of two commissioned officers, and twenty seven-enlisted men from
the enemy. The officers and men of the 125th Ills., on this spirited
occasion, displayed that high degree of coolness and bravery so
essential to success. The brigade lay in this position for several days,
holding works. June 1st moved toward the left, and relieved a brigade of
the 23rd corps, remaining in this new position under a constant fire
from the enemy, until June 4th, when it moved about three miles further
to the left, and, with the division, rejoined the corps. The brigade
performed the various duties imposed upon it; sometimes skirmishing with
the enemy, changing position, building fortifications, or holding those
built by others, but all without taking any active part in any general
engagement, until on the morning of the 27th of June, when it was
disposed in order of battle as follows: 85th Ills. deployed as
skirmishers, with lines of battle composed of first, the 125th Ills.;
second, the 86th Ills.; third, the 22nd Ind., and fourth, the 52nd Ohio.
These dispositions were made in an open field, little more than half a
mile from the works to be stormed. The 2nd brigade was formed on the
right, and Gen. Harker's brigade of the 4th corps, on the left. At a few
moments before nine, the command "forward" was given and responded to by
the brave men of the brigade with a will and determination to succeed
when success is possible. The movement began in quick, and continued in
this time for near one third the distance, when the step was changed to
double-quick. The lines moved with marked precision, until they reached
the foot of an abrupt hill where they encountered a marshy creek lined
on either side with shrubs and thickly matted vines. The command
relieved itself as rapidly and orderly as possible from this confusion,
and turning its face towards the enemy, rushed forward across an open
field extending to within fifteen rods of the point of attack. Here it
entered a skirt of light timber, and from this point also commenced an
ascent of the ground. On, and up the brave men rushed with their gallant
leader at their head, until some of them reached the base of the enemy's
parapet. Nothing daunted they struggled to scale the works. In their
efforts to do this, some were knocked down with stones and clubs hurled
at them by the enemy. Here the gallant McCook fell, mortally wounded,
while present with, and cheering his men on. Shot and stoned down
completely exhausted by the length and impetuosity of the charge, the
brave men reformed their lines a few steps in the rear, and partially
under the crest of the hill. While this was being done, Col. O. G.
Harmon, of the 125th Ills., left the command of the regiment to Maj. J.
B. Lee, and placed himself at the head of the brigade. But hardly did he
enjoy this new command five minutes, when a musket shot from the enemy
pierced his heart, and in a few moments his remains were borne from the
field. Col. C. J. Dilworth then assumed command, and after adjusting his
lines to his satisfaction, he ordered works to be constructed, the front
line of which did not exceed sixty yards from the enemy's strong line of
works.

The loss to the brigade in this bloody encounter was four hundred and
ten, nearly all of which occurred within the short space of twenty
minutes. These casualties fell heaviest upon the 125th Illinois and 52d
Ohio. By three o'clock p. m. the men were sheltered by their new lines
of works and were confronting the enemy as sharp-shooters. At four
o'clock of the same day, upon my request to be relieved from duty at
corps headquarters, I returned to and took command of my regiment. From
this point forward in my report I am chiefly reliant for information on
the notes and memoranda of Col. Dilworth. After the confusion of the
battle was over, the brigade was disposed thus: The 85th Illinois on the
right, connecting with the 2d brigade; the 22d on the left, connecting
with Gen. Harker's brigade; the 125th Illinois in the center, and the
86th Illinois and 52d Ohio in reserve. The lines remained the same until
the morning of the 28th, when the 125th Illinois was relieved by the
86th Illinois, that in turn was relieved on the morning of the 29th by
the 52d Ohio. On this day a cessation of hostilities was effected, and
arrangements made, under flag of truce, by which the dead between the
lines were removed or buried. On the 30th under my personal supervision
a new line of works was constructed within from five to seven rods of
the enemy's strong works. From this position our sharp-shooters did
excellent service, many of them using an invention called the
"refracting sight," the testimony in favor of the use of which at short
range was abundant. The brigade did duty here until the morning of the
3rd of July. The enemy having again abandoned his works, we marched
through Marietta, thence in a south-west course about five miles toward
Atlanta. We halted and encamped here for two nights. On the morning of
the 5th of July, we advanced again about five miles towards the railroad
bridge over the Chattahoochie river. Upon our arrival within about three
miles of the bridge, we came up with the enemy's skirmishers. The 3rd
brigade was put in position in a heavy wood, connecting on the left with
the 2d brigade. As soon as the lines were formed, I was ordered forward
with the 125th as skirmishers. The line was at once established and
waited for support on the right, which was late arriving. About five
o'clock, all things being ready, the line advanced at the double quick
across an open field, and charged the enemies' skirmishers behind works
at the verge of the woods on the opposite side. Routing them from these,
we drove them in confusion to their main line of fortifications, our own
line pursuing to within less than three hundred yards. The enemy made
three unsuccessful attempts to drive our line back. As soon as it was
dark the 86th Illinois relieved the skirmish line, and by morning were
well entrenched. The other regiments of the brigade moved forward to the
road and threw up works. The command remained in this position, each
regiment in its turn doing picket duty until the morning of the 10th of
July, when a little before daylight the bridge over the Chattahoochie
river was discovered to be on fire, and no enemy in our front. Col.
Dilworth was ordered to made a reconnoisance with the 86th Illinois, and
accompanied it in person as far as the river, meeting with no
opposition, when he returned with all but two companies, which he left
at the river as pickets. On the afternoon of the same day the brigade
moved down to the Atlanta road and went into camp on the right and
within one mile of the railroad bridge, in which position we remained
doing picket and guard duty until the morning of the 18th, on which day
we crossed the Chattahoochie river on a pontoon bridge at Paces' Ferry,
and about five miles above the railroad bridge. On the same day we
crossed Nancy's creek, and advanced skirmishers from the 22d Indiana as
far as Peach Tree creek near Howell's mill. The brigade bivouacked for
the night on the Atlanta and Pace's Ferry road.

As the 19th of July was an eventful day in the history of this brigade,
I choose to incorporate in this report the minutes of its operations
made by Col. Dilworth at the time:

"This morning I was ordered to form my lines in rear of skirmish line
and push across the Peach Tree creek. This was done by placing the 52d
Ohio in advance, crossing the creek on a log, and moving out across the
field and over the hill. Here we found an entire brigade of rebels and a
portion of another. The balance of our brigade crossed, 1st, 85th
Illinois and went to the assistance of the 52d Ohio on the left, and
found a heavy force. Next came the 125th Illinois and moved forward to
the crest of the hill. Next the 86th Illinois and formed on the left.
The 22d Indiana at the same time commenced crossing on our right and
connected with the 52d Ohio skirmishers on the right. Word was sent to
Gen. Davis for assistance, at the same time information was received
that the enemy were drifting to the right. Col. Langley, of the 125th
Illinois, was ordered to form on the right, which he did at a
double-quick, and just reached the top of the hill as the enemy were
ready to attack, and after a fire from the 125th the rebels were driven
back from the right. That night entrenchments were thrown up, and the
men remained on the ground getting in the wounded."

The brigade lost in this day's operations two hundred and forty-five
men, killed, wounded and missing. These losses fell heaviest on the 52d
Ohio, 22d Indiana and 85th Illinois. The morning of July 20th found the
brigade well fortified, and about noon two sections of Capt. Gardner's
battery were put in position, which with the aid of sharp-shooters from
this and the 2d brigade, succeeded in driving the enemy from his works.
On the same day the 110th Illinois, Lieut. Col. Topping commanding,
reported for duty and was put in line on the right. July 21st Col.
Dilworth was ordered to make a reconnoisance with one regiment. He
ordered out the 125th Illinois and connected with Col. Mitchell's
brigade on the left and Gen. Morgan's on the right; moved too far to the
right; found rebels near Moore's house on the Marietta and Atlanta road
and returned to camp. July 22d—No enemy in our immediate front. Moved
towards Atlanta to within two and a half miles of the city. Heavy
cannonading to our front and left. Went into camp at night in reserve.
July 24th—Relieved a regiment of Gen. Beard's division with the 125th
Illinois. Remained in this position with a slight change of camp until
the morning of the 28th of July. One regiment on out-post duty daily.
July 28th—In connection with the division made a reconnoisance to
Turner's Ferry, intending to strike the enemy in left flank, but being
misled by an inefficient guide, the division took no part in the
engagement of this day. After a long meandering and weary march, we
returned late at night to near our old camp. From this date forward our
duties were various. We built several lines of works, did picket duty,
and changed position towards the right and front about three miles, and
went into position in the evening, connecting with Gen. Baird on the
left, 125th Ills. on the left, and the 22nd Ind. on the right of the
front line, with the 85th Ills. on picket. On the following morning the
picket line moved nearly three quarters of a mile to the front, and took
fifteen prisoners with no loss to us. The main line moved forward, still
keeping up the connection with General Baird on the left, and also
connecting with Col. Mitchell on the right. Four companies of the 52nd
Ohio relieved the 85th Ills. pickets. July 6th; brigade in same
position, the enemy almost constantly shelling our lines. At night
seventy-five men from the 110th Ills. relieved the 52nd Ohio on picket.
I quote below, substantially, Col. Dilworth's minutes of the operations
of the brigade on the 7th of July:

"Received orders about ten o'clock, that the division was to swing to
the left, and that the movement would begin on the left. About noon I
went to the lines and saw General Baird, who said he could not advance
until evening. As soon as he had gone I received orders that Gen. Morgan
had commenced the movement on the right, and for me to conform my
movements to Mitchell's. I then went to the right, and found Col.
Mitchell had advanced. My skirmish line was advanced, and the 125th
Ills. was ordered forward, the 52nd Ohio was ordered up also. The 22nd
Ind. advanced and connected with Col. Mitchell on the right and facing
north-east. At night the 86th relieved the 110th Ills. on picket."

In gaining this new and important position, the brigade was exposed to a
galling fire of musketry and artillery from the enemy's lines, and with
but little chance to us to return, successfully, the fire. The brigade
took possession of, and extended its lines across, the Sand Town road,
and as speedily as possible erected strong fortifications. The loss to
the brigade in this day's operations, was forty-two officers and men
killed and wounded. Nothing of further importance than frequent changes
of camp, and position in line, and picket duty, occurred until August
20th, on which day the brigade started at day break and marched to the
rear lines of works of the 23rd corps, where we lay in close column for
two or three hours, when orders came to move out. The whole division
moved toward the right of our lines, with this brigade in advance. We
marched rapidly to the line of the West Point rail road at Red Oaks;
tore up track, and cut the telegraph wires in sight of a large force of
rebel cavalry. Returned to camp at night after making a march of 22
miles, most of the time in heavy rain and mud. From this time forth, the
brigade performed its usual duties until August 26th, when we broke up
camp and marched out with the division to contribute our remaining
efforts to turn the enemy's left, and destroy the Macon rail road, the
last and only line of transit for subsistence to his army at Atlanta. By
the last of August it was very generally conceded that the enemy would
tender us battle, as usual, on his choice of ground, and within his
strong fortifications. On this last named day, we marched to an
encampment for the night near Turtle Swamp, on the left of the Atlanta
and Jonesboro road. On the following morning, early, we moved across to,
and down, the Rough and Ready and Jonesboro road toward the latter named
place, to a point about one half mile south of Flint river. Here the
brigade moved to the left in an open field, and formed in order of
battle as follows: First line, 22nd Ind. on the right, 125th Ills. in
the center, and the 52nd Ohio on the left, except three companies of the
52nd Ohio, which were deployed as skirmishers; the second line comprised
the 85th, 86th and 110th Ills. About 2 o'clock p. m., the brigade moved
by the right flank across a difficult slough, and reformed its lines on
the crest of a hill beyond, and under a heavy fire from the enemy's
artillery. From this point we discovered that the enemy were in strong
force and well intrenched along the line of the Macon railroad. At about
3 o'clock p. m., our line advanced through a thick skirt of woods to an
open corn-field beyond, swinging gradually to the right as it advanced
down the slope beyond, until our course was nearly south. We moved to
within one fourth of a mile of the enemy's line of works, and engaged
his skirmishers with our own, while the main line was struggling to
cross a swamp at the foot of the slope. As soon as a crossing was
effected the enemy's skirmishers were vigorously attacked and driven to
their main works. In this valley the first line built temporary works
which it held but a few minutes, when it again moved forward. A part of
the 52nd Ohio, charging with the 2nd brigade, aided in taking a rebel
battery in their front. The 22nd Ind. and 125th Ills. advanced in quick
time to the crest of the hill, where they encountered a line of rebels
concealed among the standing corn. These two regiments became at once
hotly engaged. The contest for a few moments appeared doubtful, and
might finally have turned in favor of the enemy, but for the success of
the 2nd brigade on our left. As soon as this success was known, not one
moment was lost by the 22nd Ind. and 125th Ills. in charging the enemy's
line, which finally yielded and broke, the men running in confusion to
their intrenchments, but just in time to find themselves our prisoners.
After driving the enemy back some six or seven hundred yards to their
second line of works on the rail road, and the woods to the west of the
rail road, our lines were about being reformed, when Col. Dilworth,
commanding the brigade, received a severe wound, and was carried off the
field. As soon as notified of this fact, I assumed command, and as
rapidly as possible reformed my somewhat broken lines. Going a few rods
to the left and rear, I met Captain Swift, brigade inspector, coming
forward with the 85th Ills. from the second line. This I put to work to
turn the rebel fortifications, and make them available to us in the
event of a counter assault. Meeting with other members of the brigade
staff, I directed them to bring forward the 86th and 110th Ills. as
rapidly as possible, and hold them in readiness for further orders. In
the mean time I drew from their former positions, the 125th Ills. and
22nd Ind., to give them some rest. At this juncture Col. Mitchell
represented to me, that the enemy were massing in his front with a view
to an attack, and asked me to send him some assistance. Knowing the
importance of holding the hill we jointly occupied, I immediately sent
him five companies from the 86th Ills., and seven from the 52nd Ohio. In
a few minutes the other battalion of the 86th Ills., also went to his
assistance. This force remained with Col. Mitchell about one hour, and I
depend on him to do them justice in his report.

Between the right of the 2nd brigade and the left of the 15th corps, was
a gap in the lines about one half mile wide. The threatening
demonstrations of the enemy in front of this gap, showed the importance
he attached to it, and I determined to throw all my available force
into, and as far as possible close, it up. I accordingly moved the 125th
Ills, to the right and front, as far as the crest of the hill, putting
it nearly in the same position it occupied while fighting half an hour
before. I then moved the 85th Ills. to the right, and the 110th Ills. to
the left of the 125th, and directed them to put out as many sharp
shooters as could be made available, to annoy and keep back the enemies'
skirmishers, while the main line was ordered to construct works. The
firing was kept up until dark. Several times the enemy attempted to
advance, but were driven back to their works by the unerring aim of our
guns. On the return of the 86th Ills., and the 52nd Ohio, from the
assistance of the 2nd brigade, I put the first in position on the right,
with the right well refused. The 52nd Ohio and 22nd Ind. were placed in
reserve. Each regiment furnished pickets for its front, the entire
picket line being under the especial charge of Captain Burkhalter,
brigade provost marshal. These dispositions, in my opinion, rendered our
position perfectly secure. At night the enemy abandoned his works,
leaving his dead unburied, and wounded uncared for. Our loss in this
day's fight was one hundred and thirty-five killed and wounded. The loss
fell heaviest on the 22nd Ind. and 125th Ills.

We advanced about 10 o'clock to Jonesboro, went into position on the
left of the rail road and town, where we remained until late in the day
of Sept. 3rd, when I received orders from Major Gen. Davis, commanding
the corps, to remove the brigade to Atlanta on the following day, to
guard prisoners of war, and as escort to corps hospital trains. Arrived
at this place on the afternoon of Sept 4th, with 1674 prisoners, and
trains. Reported pursuant to orders, to Maj. Gen. Slocum, and went into
camp on the west side of town, where the troops have remained doing no
duty since.

In this review of the history of the third brigade during the late
campaign, I have confined myself thus far, as nearly as possible, to a
simple recitation of facts and circumstances; having been absent from
the brigade a part of the time, and afterwards only with one of its
regiments until the late fight at Jonesboro. Special mention of the
conduct of many brave officers and soldiers, would, perhaps, meet with
little favor from my feeble pen, even of those who have distinguished
themselves by their heroic and daring behavior on every battle field. So
far as I can learn, on the march, and in every engagement, they all did
their entire duty, and the appalling casualty list, show the sanguinary
character of the many conflicts in which these troops have taken part.
The losses of the brigade foot up, since the 3rd day of May last, the
enormous sum of ONE THOUSAND AND EIGHTY-TWO, killed, wounded and
missing, being little less than the number now present in the ranks for
duty. The brigade met with its heaviest loss in the assault on the
enemy's works at Kenesaw Mountain, June 27th. The number has been stated
previously. There every regiment was engaged, and where the contest was
hottest, the front line could be claimed by no particular regiment, but
was made up of the bravest men from all. At Peach Tree creek, July 14th,
the 52nd Ohio, commanded by Lieut. Col. Clancey, with skirmishers, under
command of Major Holmes, did nobly in clearing the heights beyond the
creek, thus enabling the remainder of the brigade to cross and form line
free from the enemies fire. In the same engagement, the 85th Ills.,
commanded by Major Rider, advanced to within a few yards of the enemy's
main line, but could not hold its position. The loss to the regiment was
heavy, but it behaved manfully. The 22nd Ind., commanded, in the early
part of the engagement, by Maj. Shea, stood, unsupported, the brunt of a
heavy assault, and yielded only as it was overpowered by superior
numbers. Maj. Shea was wounded, and the command fell to Captain
Snodgrass, under whose charge it has been most of the time since. The
conduct of this officer, and his command, were all that could be asked
in the late battle of Jonesboro, and as truly may I say the same of Maj.
Holmes, who commanded the 52nd Ohio in the same engagement, until
wounded and disabled, when the command devolved upon Capt. Rothacker.
Also the 85th Ills., commanded by Maj. Rider until disabled, when the
charge of the regiment fell to Captain Griffith. The 86th Ills.
commanded part of the time by Lt. Col. Fahnestock, and part by Maj.
Thomas. The 110th Ills., commanded throughout by Lieut. Col. Topping,
and also the 125th Ills., commanded, through the latter part of the
engagement, by Captain Geo. W. Cook. I wish to bear testimony to the
general good conduct and bravery of the several officers above named,
and their respective commands. I observed several striking instances of
noble courage and true bravery among subordinate officers and enlisted
men, but want of space forbids that I should mention them here. The
reports from the commanders of regiments must suffice. Captains
Anderson, Swift and Burkhalter, and Lieut. Tanner, of the brigade staff,
are all known to the brigade, and appreciated for their coolness and
bravery in action. My heartfelt thanks are due to the three last named
for the eminent assistance they so cheerfully rendered me during the
engagement on the 1st instant. Captain Anderson, A. A. A. Gen., while in
the discharge of his duties, received a severe wound just before the
command of the brigade fell to my charge, thus depriving me of his
valuable services.

Our honored dead, of whom from this brigade there are many have all
received a soldier's burial, and their scattered graves mark the
meandering course of our march all the way from Resaca to Atlanta.

                            I have the honor to be, Captain,
                              Very respectfully, your obdt. servant.
                       (Signed)                       JAS. W. LANGLEY,
                                   Lt. Col. 125th Ills., comd'g brigade.

  To
      Theodore Wiseman,
        Capt. and A. A. Genl., 2nd Div., 14th A. C.


               BRIGADE REPORT FROM ATLANTA, FLORENCE, TO
                             SAVANNAH, GA.

                           Headquarters 3rd Brigade, 2nd Division,
                                14th Army Corps, Army of Georgia, near
                                       Savannah, Ga., January 3rd, 1865.

CAPTAIN: Pursuant to orders, of date Dec. 28th, 1864, I have the honor
to report substantially the operations of my command, from the fall of
Atlanta, up to, and including the, fall of Savannah.

On the fourth day of September last, my command, comprising the 85th,
86th and 125th Ills., the 52nd Ohio, the 22nd Ind., and three companies
of the 110th Ills. Vols., moved from Jonesboro in charge of the 14th
army corps hospital trains, and about seventeen hundred prisoners of
war, to Atlanta, reaching the latter place about sundown. After
reporting to Maj. Gen. Slocum, then commanding at Atlanta, and turning
over my prisoners, by his orders I went into camp to the left of the
White Hall road, just beyond the suburbs of the city, where I remained
until the 29th day of September, when I received orders to move to
Chattanooga by cars as rapidly as possible. At about 9 o'clock p. m., I
got the brigade on board a train of cars going north, and arrived at
Chattanooga Oct. 1st, at 3 o'clock p. m. General Morgan having
previously gone to Huntsville, Ala., with the 1st and 2nd brigades of
the division, I reported in person to Maj. Gen. Thomas, who directed me
to proceed to Huntsville as rapidly as I could do with safety. I
accordingly started on a train from Chattanooga at sundown, and arrived
safely at Huntsville at 12 o'clock m., Oct. 2nd and went into camp on
the south side of town, where we remained about two hours, when I
received orders to move to the depot immediately. On going to my
command, I found it all asleep, a luxury the men had not enjoyed since
leaving, Atlanta, three days before. Shortly after arriving at the
depot, we commenced reloading the same cars from which we had
disembarked but two or three hours previously. At dark the entire
division moved towards Athens, six miles when we met with obstructions
on the road that delayed us until next morning, when we again started,
reaching within six miles of Athens by noon. Here were other
obstructions in the road, and we disembarked for the last time. By the
order of Gen. Morgan, I directed Capt. Cook, commanding the 125th Ills.,
to guard the empty trains back to Huntsville, and return to the brigade
by next train. At 2 o'clock p. m., the brigade marched with the division
to Athens, and went into camp in two lines, facing south-east. It will
be seen that my command was three days and four nights traveling from
Atlanta to Athens, and with the exception of about six hours of that
time they were on the cars, so closely crowded that none could lie down,
even had that been possible they could not have slept, owing to the very
heavy rain that fell almost without intermission during the trip. It was
the ill fortune of my brigade, to ride on trains managed by drunken,
incompetent, and irresponsible conductors and engineers, who, for the
most part, seemed perfectly indifferent to the sufferings and
inconvenience they imposed upon the soldiers, so long as they enjoyed
official confidence, a profitable salary, and plenty to eat.

On the morning of the fourth of October, the brigade, except the 125th
Ills., not yet returned from Huntsville, and the 110th Ills., in charge
of supplies, marched from Athens toward Florence, fording the Elk River
at Brown's Ferry, about sundown, after which it marched four miles to
Rogersville and encamped for the night. Oct. 5th, marched at 6 o'clock
a. m., crossed Shoal creek at dark, and went into camp beyond and within
seven miles of Florence. Oct. 6th, the first brigade moved toward
Florence at 7 o'clock a. m. but met the enemy's cavalry skirmishers just
beyond our picket line. I was immediately ordered to follow with three
regiments, leaving one as camp guard. It was with little difficulty that
a reconnoisance was pushed through to Florence, as it was afterwards
ascertained that the enemy opposing our progress thither, amounted to
only about one hundred and fifty men. We reached the town at 1 o'clock
p. m., and there learned certainly, what we already suspected, that
Forrest had escaped across the Tennessee. At 3 o'clock p. m., we
returned to Shoal creek, reaching there about sundown. On the following
morning the entire command with the division returned to Florence, and
went into camp on the south-east side of the town, where we remained two
days.

Up to this time, from the date of our departure from Atlanta, it rained
heavily every day, rendering the roads from Athens to Florence very
muddy, besides swelling the numerous streams to their banks. These
streams we were compelled to ford, with the exception of Shoal creek,
which had a good bridge. The men were drenching wet, adding greatly to
the weight of their loads, and their sleep, though sound, was the sleep
of exhaustion and afforded them but little rest. Besides many were bare
footed and foot sore. Those who fell sick by the way side, were left in
houses to the care of the citizens, as we had no means of
transportation. The citizens, as far as I am able to learn, uniformly
treated our sick soldiers with a great deal of kindness. Officers had no
comforts or conveniences above those of enlisted men, and indulged only
in such luxuries as they could transport by virtue of their own physical
strength. In short I do not hesitate to say, that our trip from Atlanta
to Florence, came nearer tasking to the utmost, the physical endurance
of the American soldier, than any campaign I ever witnessed, and I
cannot withhold the mead of praise so eminently due the brave officers
and men who made it. They performed all that was required of them with
that characteristic cheerfulness, which has recently become so strongly
engrafted in the heart of our army. Oct. 10th, we left Florence on our
way back towards Athens, marched nineteen miles, and encamped for the
night. Oct. 11th, resumed march towards Athens, and encamped for the
night within eight miles of the town. Oct. 12th, reached Athens at 10
o'clock a. m., where the 125th Ills. rejoined the brigade. We moved two
miles east of town, and went into temporary camp. At 2 o'clock p. m., I
received orders from Gen. Morgan to detail one regiment to rebuild a
rail road bridge across a branch of Lime Stone creek, which next morning
it had completed, and about noon cars began to arrive at Athens to
transport the division to Chattanooga. My command got off at 4 o'clock
a. m., Oct. 13th, and reached Chattanooga at midnight and went in camp
in two lines on the west side of town where it remained four days. My
first effort was to procure shoes and clothing for my barefooted and
almost naked men. I succeeded in procuring 785 pairs of shoes, and a
sufficient supply of clothing. At the expiration of our four days rest
at Chattanooga, we marched, on the morning of the 18th of October, by
the Rossville and Dry Valley roads, to Lee and Gordon's mills on the
Chickamauga river and encamped for the night. Oct. 19th marched to La
Fayette and camped for the night. Oct. 20th, marched south from La
Fayette about twelve miles and turned to the right, on a road leading to
Brown Town Valley, and after fording Chattanooga river, we went into
camp for the night. October 21st, marched 25 miles on Brown Town Valley
road towards Galesville. Oct. 22nd, marched to Galesville, and went into
camp north of town, where we joined the corps and remained five days,
subsisting partly on government rations, and partly on the country. Oct.
28th, left camp at 2 o'clock p. m., and marched 8 miles towards Rome and
camped for the night at Missionary station, near the state line. Oct.
29th, resumed the march at 6 o'clock a. m., and encamped at night on the
north side of the Ostanalla river, and within one mile of Rome, where we
remained until Oct. 31st, when I received orders to march to Kingston as
guard to corps train. My command left Rome at 3 o'clock p. m., marched 8
miles and encamped at night on Cedar creek. Resumed march at 7 a. m.
next day, and reached Kingston within three hours, when it went into
camp and remained until November 8th, on which day we marched to
Cartersville and encamped south-west of town about two miles, until
November 12th, when I was ordered to relieve a brigade of the 2nd
division, 15th army corps, at the fort on the Etowah river. November
13th, marched to Ackworth, stopping on the way to tear up and destroy
three and a half miles of rail road track and ties; reached camp at 9 p.
m. November 14th, marched by way of Kenesaw Mountain to within four
miles of Chattahoochie river. November 15th, resumed march at 6 o'clock
a. m., crossed the river on pontoon bridge and reached Atlanta at 1
o'clock p. m. This may be said to finish the North Alabama campaign,
having been gone from Atlanta forty-eight days, instead of four, as was
expected. Before reaching Atlanta, I sent orders to Captain Hall,
commanding a small detachment of the brigade at that place, to procure
guns, accoutrements and ammunition for every man in his command able to
march, and I also had requisitions made by regimental commanders, for
the amount of such ordnance stores required to perfectly equip their
command. I had also an officer detailed from each regiment to take these
requisitions to Atlanta, and give them their personal attention. These
were sent from Kingston as soon as I received intelligence that we would
shortly cut loose from our "old base;" but they failed to get the men
properly armed, in consequence of the surplus ordnance stores having
been shipped from Atlanta before their arrival. This left my command on
reaching Atlanta, short fifty-four guns and accoutrements. From
Kingston, also, I directed my brigade quartermaster, Lieut. A. M. Ayers,
to proceed to Atlanta and draw his estimate of clothing and allowance of
transportation. This he did to my entire satisfaction, having procured a
sufficient number of shoes to give every man two pair; the result of
which was, that upon our arrival at Savannah, I had not a barefoot
soldier in my command.

The 3rd brigade, comprising 1721 total commissioned officers and
enlisted men present, left Atlanta Nov. 16th, at 12 m., and marched on
the Decatur road 9 miles and camped for the night. Nov. 17th, marched at
7 a. m. by way of Lithonia to Conyer's station. During the afternoon of
this day we tore up and destroyed three miles of rail road track and
ties. Nov. 18th, marched at 6 o'clock a. m. on the Covington road, and
camped for the night three miles east of that town. To-day the brigade
destroyed two and a half miles of railroad track and ties. To-day, also,
we began to subsist off the country. Nov. 19th, marched at 6 o'clock a.
m., crossed Alcova river, and went into camp at dark near Shady Dale.
Nov. 20th, marched at 7 a. m., and camped at night near Eatonton
Factory. Nov. 21st, marched at 6 o'clock a. m., and camped at night on
east side of Cedar creek. Nov. 22nd, laid still to-day and let the 1st
and 3rd divisions of the corps pass by. Nov. 23rd, marched at 6 a. m.
with two regiments as train guard, and two as rear guard, and camped at
night within two miles of Milledgeville, the rear guard reaching camp at
half past 9 o'clock p. m. Nov. 24th marched at 10 o'clock a. m. through
Milledgeville, Georgia's capitol, with colors displayed, and bands
playing national airs, and camped at night seven miles beyond, on the
Sandersville road. Nov. 25th, marched at 6 a. m. to Buffalo creek, where
we found the bridge had been destroyed just before our arrival. My
command marched at the head of the division column to-day; upon its
reaching this creek I set to work a company of pioneers and two
companies of men from the 22nd Indiana, and in half an hour had
constructed a very good foot bridge, upon which I crossed the 22nd Ind.,
and afterwards the entire brigade. Leaving my pioneer party to assist
Col. Buell in putting down a pontoon bridge for the crossing of trains,
we camped at night on Keg creek. Nov. 26th, marched at 6 o'clock a. m.,
crossed Keg creek and met rebel skirmishers within ten miles of
Sandersville. My foraging party assisted the troops in the advance to
drive the enemy through town. We arrived in town at 10 o'clock a. m.,
and went into camp on the north side. Nov. 27th, marched at 7 a. m. on
the Louisville road, crossed the Ogechee river, and camped within eight
miles of Louisville for the night. Nov. 28th, marched at 6 o'clock a. m.
to within one mile of Louisville, where we found that the bridge across
Rocky Comfort creek, had been burnt, and was being repaired by the 3rd
division, 14th army corps. At dusk I crossed my command over, marched
through the town, and went into camp on the left of the Augusta road,
about one and a half miles beyond. Nov. 29th, remained in camp all day.
Nov. 30th, still in camp at Louisville. To-day I deployed the 86th and
125th Ills. as skirmishers, supported by the 52nd Ohio and 22nd Ind. and
moved forward, covering the Warrenton and Augusta roads. This movement
was induced by the presence in our vicinity of small parties of the
enemy's cavalry, that had for two or three days past, been capturing and
murdering foragers and other soldiers who were so unfortunate as to fall
into their power. The enemy had, on the night previous to this movement,
captured and killed two men of the 85th Ills., and one of the 125th
Ills. My line advanced at 11 o'clock a. m. and drove the enemy in fine
style, recapturing a small foraging party with trains from the 20th
corps, that had ventured too far out. Pretty smart skirmishing continued
for some minutes, when the enemy attempted to break my line, but were
repulsed by the 86th Ills., with the loss of one captain and one
private, who were killed outright, and left by the flying enemy on the
field. At this juncture, by order of Gen. Morgan, I halted and adjusted
my line. Everything remained quiet until 3:30 p. m., when I received
orders to move forward until my right should connect with the left of
the 2nd brigade, which was moving across towards the Augusta from the
Waynsboro road. In this movement my line advanced at the double quick
across a corn-field, to the woods beyond, driving the enemy out of a
line of works about two hundred yards in length. It being deemed useless
to pursue cavalry with infantry, I was directed at sun down to withdraw
my brigade, and reestablish my picket line as it had been in the
morning, which I did, the enemy following the skirmish line as it
retired. In this day's operations a good deal of shooting was done by
the enemy, but in driving him more than a mile, he did not succeed in
wounding one of our men. We recovered the bodies of the enlisted men
murdered the night before. I have no hesitancy in saying they were
deliberately murdered after they had surrendered, as was evinced by an
examination of the fatal wounds. One man was shot through the head, the
ball entered just above the left ear, surrounding the entrance the hair
was singed close to the scalp by the burning powder. The other two were
shot through the body; one was shot three times, and the other twice. So
close was the weapon held when discharged, that in every instance the
clothing was scorched and burned.

In front of the left of my picket line, stood a cotton gin containing
forty-eight bales of cotton, the property of Asa Hoyt, behind which the
enemy had concealed himself, and fired upon my men in the morning. Not
willing to give him the advantage of that position longer, upon the
withdrawal of my troops, I detailed Major Holmes, 52nd Ohio, with a
small number of men to destroy it, which they accordingly did, and which
fact I reported to you in writing, while the gin was still burning. This
embraces the only property of any kind burned by my orders during the
campaign. Dec. 1st, marched at 10 a. m. as guard to 3rd division train,
and reached camp at 11 p. m. Dec. 2nd, marched at 8 a. m. Furnished two
regiments to guard the corps reserve artillery and ammunition trains,
and reached camp at 8 p. m. Dec. 3rd, marched at 9 a. m. on Augusta
road; crossed Buckhead creek and went into camp at dark on Mill creek,
near Lumpton's station. Dec. 4th, marched at noon in rear of, and as
guard to, 3rd division trains; passed through Habersham, and went into
camp at 10 p. m. Dec. 5th, marched at 7 o'clock a. m.; furnished guard
of two regiments for corps reserve artillery trains, and camped for the
night at 7 p. m. Dec. 6th, marched at 6:30 a. m.; good roads all day.
Marched twenty-one and a half miles on main Savannah road, and went into
camp for the night Road blocked just ahead of this camp for three
quarters of a mile by fallen trees. At night I made a detail of
sufficient pioneer force to clear the road, which they accomplished by 9
p. m. Dec. 7th, marched at 11 a. m. in rear of, and as guard to, 3rd
division trains. Reached camp at Ebeneezer creek at 8 p. m. Dec 8th,
marched at 7 a. m.; order of march changed. Left all transportation
excepting that belonging to brigade and regimental headquarters; crossed
Ebeneezer creek at 12 m. and awaited the building of a bridge over
little Kogglies creek; after which we marched four miles beyond, and
went into camp at 8 p. m. In half an hour afterwards I received orders
to return and camp for the night between the two creeks. Got into camp
at 11 p. m. Dec. 9th, marched at 7 a. m., moved four miles and built two
bridges over creeks. Moved about four miles farther on and encountered a
section of a rebel battery planted in the road, well protected by a
substantial earth work. I received orders from Gen. Morgan to send the
125th Ills. forward, deployed as skirmishers, on each side of the road,
and develop, if possible, the strength of the enemy. The regiment thus
moved to within one hundred yards of the rebel works, without drawing a
shot from the enemy's musketry, though his artillery played continually
upon a piece of our own posted in the road. The enemy had selected a
good position to make a brief stand with a small number of men, having
built his works in the center, and on either side of the road, just
beyond where it divides a swamp. By direction of Gen. Morgan, I pushed
forward the 86th Ills., six companies as skirmishers, until it joined
the right of the 125th Ills. I then directed Lieut. Col. Fahnestock,
commanding the 86th Ills., to wheel gradually to the left, and if
possible get his right to the enemy's rear. This he did, so far as was
in his power, but his whole line was in a swamp, where vines, rank
weeds, and undergrowth timber was so abundant, that his progress was
necessarily too slow to reach the desired position before dark, and at
dark, by order of Gen. Morgan, the entire line was halted and
established as a picket line for the night. During the night the enemy
withdrew, and my skirmishers entered his works at daybreak. In this
affair two men of the 86th Ills. were wounded. Dec. 10th, marched at 7
a. m.; proceeded five miles in the direction of Savannah, when we struck
the 20th army corps column. Went into camp for the afternoon and night,
on the left of the road. Dec. 11th, marched at 8 a. m. towards the city
as far as the five mile post, and turned to the right and marched about
three quarters of a mile, when, by direction of Gen. Morgan, I went into
position in three lines, in reserve, facing south. My camp was as
comfortable as I could wish, being on high ground, and in the midst of a
pine grove. Dec. 12th, in the afternoon my command tore up and destroyed
two and a half miles of track and ties, on the Savannah and Macon
railroad. Dec. 13th, made the road, destroyed yesterday, suitable for a
wagon road, after which the brigade did no other duties than furnish
train and other guards, until the 22nd of December, the day subsequent
to the fall of Savannah, when my command marched to within one and a
half miles of the city, and went into camp in two lines, facing north,
on the left of the canal, where we now are, making preparations for such
other work as may be our lot to perform. This brigade, though small, is,
perhaps, in as good condition for active operations, as any. There are
many officers and men absent, whom I would be glad to have returned to
their command. While in camp at Atlanta during the month of September
last, there was perfected and forwarded a list of absentees, and efforts
were being made to secure their return, but before much could be
accomplished in this respect, the brigade was put in motion, and only
stopped since arriving at this place. The strength of the command is as
follows:

        Present: Commissioned officers, 80.  Enlisted men, 1634.
        Absent:  Commissioned officers, 58.  Enlisted men, 1177.
        Total:   Commissioned officers, 138. Enlisted men, 2811.

After two day's marching from Atlanta, I found necessity for a party of
pioneers to clear out and repair bad places in the road. To meet this
end I detailed 30 enlisted men, for whom I could not procure guns, and
armed them with spades, picks, and axes. These I put under command of
Lt. Groninger, of the 86th Ills., an officer of the proper spirit and
energy to make such a party very useful. I required these pioneers to
march, each day, at the head of the brigade column, and build rail and
pole bridges over small streams, for the safe and speedy passage of
troops, and none will fail to appreciate the utility of such a force on
all campaigns. When once drilled to labor, they will perform as much
work in the same length of time, as three times the number detailed
temporarily from the ranks. On the 18th of November, I began to subsist
off the country, and to prevent, as far as possible, pillaging and
marauding, and all manner of lawlessness, I had details of thirty men,
and one commissioned officer, made daily, from each regiment, who
reported at an hour stated, at brigade headquarters, where these details
were verified. These I put in charge of a field, or acting field
officer, whom I made responsible for the conduct of his men on that day.
I directed that every thing obtained should be reported to this officer,
and by him turned over, if subsistence for the troops, to the brigade
commissary, or if mules and horses, to the brigade quartermaster. By so
doing my foragers always obtained plenty and the troops shared alike in
its distribution through the brigade commissary. From a statement
submitted to me by Lt. Batchelder, A. C. S., I find that from Nov. 16th,
until Dec. 16th, inclusive, my command drew, per man, of hard bread, 9
rations; peas, 8 rations; coffee, 26 rations; salt, 25 rations; sugar,
15 rations; bacon, 4 rations, and salt pork, 6 rations, beyond which
issues the command subsisted from the country, and always had abundance.
Besides this tabular statement of issues, I left Atlanta with 150 head
of beef cattle very poor in flesh, and already weak from travel. The
forage parties supplied the command so bountifully with fresh pork, that
but little beef was consumed on the march, and before reaching Savannah,
nearly all these cattle had died along the road, or were abandoned on
account of being too weak to travel; but still my drove increased daily
by acquisitions from the country, and on the 12th of December, when my
command reached this position, it numbered about 231 head, large and
small, all of which have since been issued to the troops. My forage
details were frequently annoyed by the enemy, but, by always keeping
well together, they were able to resist or drive away a considerable
force. On the 30th November, particularly, the foragers of the brigade,
under command of Capt. Powers, of the 22nd Ind., were attacked about
nine miles from Louisville, by a party of Wheeler's command, and after a
brisk fight, drove the enemy away. Towards night of the same day, as the
detail was proceeding to camp at Louisville, with four ox wagon loads of
forage, they were suddenly surrounded by three of Wheeler's regiments,
and after some very severe fighting, succeeded in getting into camp,
with the loss of one man killed and four wounded, and were compelled to
abandon their provisions and wagons. On the 29th November, I mounted
forty men on captured mules and horses, and placed the party under
command of Captain Harbor, of the 125th Ills., a very brave and
efficient officer. These labored to find where subsistence could be
obtained, and to aid the infantry details in getting it, as well as for
the purpose of capturing stock for the use of the army. It is not
possible for me to state the exact number of horses and mules captured,
as such property was frequently taken from my foragers, while on their
way to camp, and informally turned over to Lt. Coe, quartermaster for
the division. How many were turned over by orders from these
headquarters, together with the number known to have been informally
returned to Lt. Coe, were: horses, 104; mules, 160; total, 264. These
numbers might have been increased somewhat, had I sent out parties to
hunt exclusively for stock, but in nearly every instance such captures
were the labors of my subsistence details.

The number of negroes that followed my column was 160. Of these 92 were
officers' servants and 68 were refugees. The latter have been sent to
division headquarters pursuant to orders. I submit and call your
attention to casualty lists of the north Alabama and the Savannah
campaigns hereto attached. A few of those marked "missing," deserve the
punishment prisoners of war usually get, but it is the misfortune of the
service that such men belong to the army and are counted as soldiers.
They were doubtless in the act of stealing something when captured. I
suppose every command has a few of such men. I know this one has, whom
to loose from the army is a gain to the government. Nor can I say much
less of some officers in the service, who in spite of their long
experience, and in face of positive orders to the contrary, suffer, nay,
by their passiveness, encourage their men to throw aside the
restrictions of discipline, and become out-laws and brigands. I believe
a company commander should be the best disciplinarian in the service,
and should feel that his position, so immediately connecting him with
the rank and file, makes him the surest conservator of the peace and
good order of the army. And an officer who from incompetency or other
cause is not well adapted to teach and maintain a good system of
discipline in his command, should be summarily dismissed from the
service. A few of such in my command I could cheerfully recommend for
dismissal, and do honestly believe the service would be promoted
thereby. Since the fall of Atlanta the brigade staff has undergone
several changes. Most of the old members were absent during the Savannah
campaign. Those at present serving on such duty, without specially
naming them here, have all well and faithfully discharged every trust
confided to them. I am also under special obligations to regimental
commanders for their efforts to maintain strict discipline throughout
the entire campaign. I commend them all to my superior officers.


                            RECAPITULATION.

Number of horses captured, 104; mules, 160; total, 264. Number of
negroes that followed the command, 160. Rations issued on the Atlanta
and Savannah campaigns per man: Hard bread, 9 rations; peas, 8 rations;
coffee, 26 rations; salt, 25 rations; sugar, 15 rations; bacon, 4
rations; salt pork, 6 rations. Amount of railroad destroyed, track and
ties, 11½ miles; cotton destroyed, 48 bales; cotton gins, one.

                            I have the honor to be Captain,
                                Very Respectfully,
                                      Your Obedient Servant
                                              JAS. W. LANGLEY,
                                             Lieut. Col. Comdg. Brigade.

  Theo. Wiseman,
    Capt. and A. A. G.
        Second Division.


             BRIGADE REPORT FROM BENTONVILLE TO GOLDSBORO,
                            NORTH CAROLINA.

                       Headquarters 3rd Brigade, 2d Division, 14th A. C.
                                       Goldsboro, N. C., March 30, 1865.

CAPTAIN: I have the honor to report herewith the operations of this
brigade from the hour I assumed command of the same up to its arrival at
this place.

A few minutes before 4 o'clock in the afternoon of the 19th, I was
informed by Capt. Swift, A. A. A. G. of the brigade, that Gen. Fearing
was wounded and disabled for further command, when I immediately assumed
command of the brigade. This was just as my own regiment came out of the
fight and began its formation on the Goldsboro road, as described in my
regimental report. Capt. Snodgrass, commanding the 22d Indiana, had
rallied about 100 men, mostly of his left wing, which had remained in
better order than his right. The 125th Illinois almost entire formed
line to the left and on the prolongation of the basis of alignment of
the 22nd Indiana. I immediately directed two staff officers to find the
52d Ohio and 86th Illinois and put them in their order on the right of
this new line. While these officers were preparing to execute this
order, I directed so much of the line as was already formed to move
forward to a point by me designated, where the left should rest, and
about seventy-five yards in advance of the rallying point. I had at this
time but one entire regiment and so much of the 22d Indiana as above
mentioned. These I directed to carry rails and when arrived at the point
to which they were ordered, to advance. I then chose my defensive line,
nearly at right angles with the Goldsboro road, and ordered works to be
rapidly constructed. As soon as the work began, a brigade of the 20th A.
C., commanded by Gen. Robinson, joined my left, and began the
construction of a refused line. I then passed towards the right and met
Capt. James, commanding a portion of the 52d Ohio, and directed him to
form on the 22d Indiana. Very soon thereafter Lieut. Col. Fahnestock
reported with a part of the 86th Illinois, whom I directed to form on
the right of the 52d Ohio, refusing well his right. By this time I may
safely say that not more than one-half the command was present. I urged
regimental commanders to bring forward their men as rapidly as possible,
and waste no time in strengthening their works. Cartridge-boxes were
nearly empty, and I directed Captain Swift to find ammunition wherever
he could and distribute it to the regiments. This he obtained from the
20th army corps, not being able to find ammunition wagons of our own
division. Men who had become separated from their commands, were rapidly
coming forward, so that the line was now compelled to yield battalion
front to the right. My works were scarcely strong enough to protect men
lying down, when the enemy's skirmishers advanced to within shooting
distance, and commenced a lively fire. At this moment a staff officer of
the Major General commanding left wing, met Captain Burkhalter, brigade
inspector, and directed that the line should be thrown back about
seventy-five yards. This direction I could not obey, even if the point,
selected by him, had been more advisable, for the main line of the enemy
at this moment vigorously assaulted my works, and were handsomely
repulsed. My line having proved available once I determined to
strengthen and hold it; besides it was the nearest position I could
obtain to the lines of the 1st and 2nd brigades of the division, which I
knew were then isolated by the intervention of a heavy rebel column.
About half an hour before sundown, Gen. Coggswell, commanding a brigade
of the 20th army corps, moved in past my right, and advanced swinging to
the left past my front, until his left rested about 150 yards to the
front of my center. Here his command became hotly engaged, but
maintained firmly its position, until darkness terminated all efforts of
the rebels to dislodge it. During the fight in front, my left was
attacked by strong columns of the enemy, but in every instance they
failed to move it. As soon as darkness came on, I directed my line of
works to be made strong, and obstructions placed in front. Though the
troops of this command had been driven back at an early period of the
day, I can bear witness to the total absence of anything like
demoralization in the ranks, in the engagement I have attempted to
describe. Men were cool and determined, and fought with the energy of
heroes. During the night I maintained a good picket line to my front. On
the morning of the 20th, at 9 o'clock, I was relieved by Gen. Carlin of
the 1st division, and directed to join the 1st and 2nd brigades. This I
did, and took position in reserve. At 9 p. m., by order of Gen. Morgan,
I placed two regiments in temporary works which had been vacated by Gen.
Baird's troops, and on the following morning I moved the two remaining
regiments of the brigade, and extended the line across the Goldsboro
road. This formation put the brigade in single line with the left much
advanced. Here I had constructed a strong line of works. This new
position placed me about one third of a mile in advance of the 1st
division of the corps, and with no connection on my left, which fact I
reported. About 10 a. m. Maj. Gen. Slocum visited my line, and informed
me that he would immediately put in troops on my left. Soon after a
division of the 20th army corps was formed, making the connection
complete, but did not remain more than half an hour, when it was
withdrawn, again leaving my left exposed. This involved the necessity of
refusing the center and left of my line so much, that it threw my entire
line on the south side of, and parallel to, the road. About 3 p. m., the
enemy opened on my skirmish line with artillery, and at the same time
advanced a line of battle and drove the skirmishers in. The line of
battle advanced to within shooting distance of my main line, but hastily
retired upon receiving our fire. The most of my line was so close to
that of the enemy, that lively picket firing was kept up all day. At
night the enemy retreated, and my skirmishers were the first to enter
his works at daybreak, which fact I reported to you at once. On the 22nd
instant the brigade marched as far as the Neuse river, and encamped for
the night. On the morning of the 23rd, it crossed the Neuse and marched
as train guard to this place, where it reached its present camp, on the
north side of the city, at dark. In order to show, to some extent, the
damage done to the enemy in the fight of the 19th instant, I have to
report that on the next day, details from this brigade, for that
purpose, buried 112 dead rebels, including 8 commissioned officers, on
our front alone. Other duties were required of the troops before the
dead were all buried. The casualty list of the brigade, pursuant to
orders, has been forwarded. My grateful thanks are due to Captain Swift,
A. A. A. G., Captain Burkhalter, A. A. I. G., and Lieut. Tanner, A. D.
C., for the efficient services they rendered me at the critical moment
when I assumed command of the brigade, and their subsequent conduct on
the field only added luster to their long acknowledged bravery; also to
Captain Stinson and Lieutenant Scroggs, of the division staff, who were,
during a portion of the engagement, cut off from their commander, and
served me to excellent purpose as volunteer aids, until communication
was opened to Gen. Morgan's quarters.

                            I have the honor to be Captain,
                                 Very Respectfully,
                                      Your Obedient Servant
                                              JAS. W. LANGLEY,
                                             Lieut. Col. Comdg. Brigade.

  To
    Theo. Wiseman,
      Capt. and A. A. G.
           Second Division.

[Illustration]




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 2. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 125TH REGIMENT, ILLINOIS VOLUNTEER INFANTRY: ATTENTION BATALLION! ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.