Transcriber’s Notes

  Words printed in italics in the original work have been transcribed
  between underscores: _text_. Small capitals have been transcribed as
  CAPITALS. More transcriber’s notes may be found at the end of this
  text.




  THE AGONY COLUMN
  OF THE “TIMES”
  1800-1870

  _WITH AN INTRODUCTION_

  EDITED BY ALICE CLAY

  [Illustration]

  London
  CHATTO AND WINDUS, PICCADILLY
  1881

  [_All rights reserved_]


PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.




INTRODUCTION.


THE contents of the little volume now presented to the public have been
taken from the second column (commonly called the “Agony Column”) of the
_Times_ newspaper, from the commencement of the present century to the
end of the year 1870.

Readers of newspapers (more especially of the _Times_) cannot fail to be
struck by the mysterious communications which daily appear, and I
venture to hope my selection of some of the most remarkable may interest
those who peruse these pages.

Most of the advertisements selected show a curious phase of life,
interesting to an observer of human existence and human eccentricities.
They are veiled in an air of mystery, with a view of blinding the
general public, but at the same time give a clue unmistakable to those
for whom they were intended.

At the early period of 1800 the “Agony Column” seems to have been the
chief medium for matrimonial advertisements; but, unfortunately, we are
left considerably in the dark, and our curiosity as to whether the young
nobleman (in advertisement No. 2) eventually married the unknown
“Catholic widow” is not gratified; but we do learn something, namely,
that love at first sight was not so rare in those days as it is supposed
to be in the present unromantic age.

There is little doubt that lovers separated by unfortunate
circumstances, or by angry parents, as well as bachelors meditating
matrimony, have found in the “Agony Column” a safe means of secret
correspondence. With what despair did “One-winged Dove” (advertisement
No. 214) beseech her lover, the “Crane,” to return to her! Sorely must
her patience have been tried as she scanned the paper in vain day after
day for four months. The answer came at last (advertisements No. 234 and
235), but only to kill every hope.

I do not know how this portion of the _Times_ newspaper came to be
called the “Agony Column;” but when we read advertisements like the one
quoted above, and which is only one in a hundred, I think all my readers
will agree that it is an unquestionably appropriate name.

Through our daily walk in life we brush up against millions of
fellow-men, yet of how few amongst them do we know anything? We each
live in a world of our own; we draw a circle, as it were, around us,
within which centre all our interests. How lightly our feelings are
touched by what happens outside our circle is shown by the exclamation
that escapes our lips as we read a fresh tragedy in the daily papers.
The actors in it are unknown to us, and in a moment or two the paper is
laid aside with a smile on our lips--the news that blighted many lives
forgotten! But if it comes within the charmed circle, how different our
feelings!

On the other hand, how very little we know of the inner or deeper life
of even those in our own little world. Romances, stranger than fiction,
happen under our very eyes, and we do not see them. With hearts that are
breaking men and women can go through the duties of every-day life,
wearing calm and even smiling faces. He knew human nature well who
wrote--

    “Broken hearts are dumb--or smile.”

What is there to tell us that such smiles are only on the surface?
Nothing. So, is it not possible that the very advertisement that
appealed to our feelings in the day’s paper may have been inserted by
some one living under the same roof with us!

We find some of the pseudonyms used by the advertisers are very
transparent disguises, for instance, “Bocaj” (advertisements No. 355 and
363), read backwards, is simply Jacob. What an insight we get here into
the writer’s character. No one possessing a sly, crafty nature would
have dictated an alias so apparent.

Many others are of the same transparent nature. In some cases numbers
have been substituted for the letters of the alphabet, and are easily
deciphered. Take, for example, advertisement No. 1561, which reads, “Z.
Y. R. Let me send correspondence with rector of college; it will
explain how things stand. I go abroad next month.”

In some advertisements the alphabet is slightly altered. Instead of
reading the letter B as printed, read C. Thus, “head” would read “if
be.” An advertisement of this description is found on June 23rd, 1864
(No. 1387)--“Alexander Rochfort reported dead. I saw you yesterday.
Moate vainly searched ten years.” The same rule applies to advertisement
No. 1454, the meaning of which is, “Bone to first joint taken out
yesterday--chloroform--régimes alone prevented me fulfilling my promise
to you--Myosotis--May 3rd.”

In advertisements No. 1701 and 1705 the alphabet is again altered, and
this time more ingeniously. Instead of the letter written supply the
second following. Thus we read in the first, “Umbrella. Dear Fanny, meet
your distracted friend beneath the willow by the lake. Row under the
stars. Common sea-breezes. Feather-weight. Yours, Bicycle.” The
advertisement preceding it is most intricate, and reads, “Wrote you
to-day. Will the letter ever reach. Love beyond telling, purely and
true. Inraptured (_sic_) with love, darling. No sleep that night.” The
spelling of this is so incorrect that it was most probably inserted by
an illiterate individual. Advertisements No. 1247, 1248, 1249, 1250 are
all from the same source, and the writers have very cleverly transposed
the whole alphabet. My readers will find that they have begun their
alphabet at the letter L. Thus L reads A; M, B; N, C, and so on through
the twenty-six letters. For example, we read in advertisement No. 1247,
“On Tuesday I sent letter to Byrne for you. May I speak fully on all
matters at the interview? It may do good. Trust to my love. I am
miserable. When may I go to Canterbury, if only to look at you?”

In advertisements No. 1650, 1651, 1660, 1666, 1670, 1680, 1681, 1696,
1697, 1698, 1702, and 1703 we go back to the simpler style of disguise,
namely, that of reading the letter that follows the one written.
Advertisement No. 1650 consequently reads, “O. Y. is ill. Do not like to
leave yet. How long notice would you want? Very kind thoughts.”
Frankenstein, in advertisements 1734, 1735, 1739, and 1747, has chosen a
disguise so clever and deep that I do not think his communications would
be easily detected; and for those of my readers who possess only a small
amount of patience and a large amount of curiosity, I give the
translation of the first of them.

“Three, four, five, six, yes to all, be cautious anywhere even in German
in case of seizure or stoppage, omit signature W for the present, twig
for safety any letter to me, safe here, trust me, I will never give you
up, never darling, put plenty of love in your letters.”

No. 1764 and 1765 are very much of the same description--clever, deep,
and remarkable for the same want of method in transposing the alphabet,
and when read are worthy of the cunning nature that devised such a
disguise. As the translation is a very tedious business and would
require a large amount of patience and perseverance I give them both:
No. 1764--“Very vexed at angry part of your letter. Why not take
interest in your appearance? Heiress be damned. Have more trust. Shall
always remain as usual yours only. V.” No. 1765--“On prowl and near
game. Party scrofulous but got the brass. Parker!! Family very soft and
come from Leeds. Make inquiries. Trust is broken reed ready wanted to
swagger withal (_sic_). Help Jones usually. V.”

Advertisement No. 1731 is equally mysterious and clever; the alphabet
commences at the letter N as in advertisement No. 1247, but is rendered
more obscure by the use of capital letters, and after having deciphered
the letters the sentence has to be divided into words; my readers will
then find it reads thus: “You only till death letter for you Sunday
night.”

I think after all the examples I have given that no one will have much
difficulty in deciphering for themselves advertisements No. 1762 and
1767 in which “Nellie” addressed herself to “Darling Alf.” Any
construction might be put on her simple message, but “I will be at the
Great Western Hotel at six on Wednesday” gives one the idea of a runaway
match, and this idea seems to be confirmed in the second advertisement,
No. 1767, in which she says, “Everything sacred as the grave” (query,
did she not mean silent?), and asks for £5 to defray expenses.

We come across a somewhat curious case in advertisements No. 694, 702,
708, 710, 713, and 715: a young lady, evidently in love, and separated
from the object of her affections, wrote to the “Agony Column” under the
name of “Puisque” (No. 694); she received no answer, so advertised again
twice (No. 702 and 708), and was evidently under a strong impression
that her lover was suffering from illness. After a few days an answer
appeared, headed “Puisque” (710), but the writer desired her to
advertise again, addressing her correspondent by his own initials. We
find in advertisement No. 713 that the lady suspected the fraud, and
then her genuine lover advertised (715) to tell her that the former one
(710) had not been inserted by him. There is little doubt that some one
interested in keeping them apart had detected the advertisement, and
under the common impression that “all is fair in love and war” had laid
aside all scruples--if he or she ever possessed any--to serve his or her
own ends. This is not the only case of mistaken identity; we find in
advertisement No. 1065 that the writer was in doubt as to whether the
one he was answering was intended for him or not.

After a very careful investigation I think the romantic pair who
advertised for some time under the disguise of “Does he repent”
(advertisements No. 923, 924, 925, and 926) were either found out or
afraid of detection, as they altered their names twice; the first time
to “Rose” and “Weed,” and again to “Blue bell” and “Lochinvar”
(advertisements No. 962 and 963). “Constantia” also appears to have had
a part in this plot (advertisement No. 969); probably she played the
part of “go-between.” Advertisements No. 1181, 1183, and one or two
others are quite legible when read backwards.

After the number of sentimental advertisements, which certainly form the
greater number in the Agony Column, it is rather a relief to find a few
ludicrous specimens, such as “Jolly to Rummy” (advertisement No. 1166);
“Portmanteau to Pack” (advertisement No. 1180); “Little Silly”
(advertisement No. 1216); “He has sneezed, etc.” (No. 1258); and a
splendid antidote to all sentimentality is expressed in the sarcasm of
advertisement No. 1237: “Fred. All right. I sympathize with your pain,
but why not seek consolation where you cannot find it, and in a way that
pains me? Write as usual. Trust Ever.”

Amongst the number of advertisements that I have passed over in silence
there are many, I have little doubt, that might be classed under the
head of stratagems, that is to say, they are inserted with a view of
deceiving those to whom they are addressed. For instance, how often do
we read nowadays: “John Smith will hear something to his advantage if he
applies in person to Tom Jones, Brown Street.” But in all probability
the same said John Smith will find that if he gratifies his curiosity by
visiting Mr. Jones at the place named, in the hope of finding a fortune
has been left to him, he will find it would have been decidedly more to
his advantage had he suppressed his curiosity and remained at home.

Nor is a hoax by any means an uncommon thing in the “Agony Column.”
There is a story--American, of course--of a man whose wife deserted him;
but instead of running after her and begging her to come back, he
published in the leading daily paper that he had drawn fifty thousand
dollars in the lottery; and the story goes that she returned
immediately. Needless to state that the prize in the lottery only
existed in the ingenious man’s imagination.

Lastly, I must draw the attention of my readers to the two most
remarkable series of advertisements, in my opinion, that have appeared
during the present century, though I feel sure that all who honour my
pages with a careful perusal will not fail to notice them without any
remark of mine.

The first series are those signed with the initials E. W., then E. J.
W., and latterly with the writer’s full address--E. J. Wilson, Ennis,
Ireland. His advertisements are headed by such a variety of names that,
at first sight, we are apt to be misled, and do not think of connecting
the writer of “Rouge et Noir” with that of “Indigo Blue” or “To the
Equator.” Nevertheless they are all from the same source, as well as
those headed “The Writer of the Anonymous Letter,” “Battledore and
Shuttlecock,” “Flybynight,” “Egypte,” “Anchor,” “Circumspice,” “Au
Simulacre,” “Decimals to Cheops,” “To Contre Coup,” “Tribe,” “Two
Hundred Pounds Reward,” “Nicht eine Million,” “Nicht Zwei Millonen,”
“Double Fin,” “Leb! Wohl,” “Poverty and Honour,” “Spurs and Skirts,” “A
La Croix Rouge,” “To the Counterfeit,” “Alpha the First,” “To St.
James,” “The Key,” “The Pillar,” “Honest Alexis,” “Hide and Seek,” “To a
Christian,” “X Cheops X,” “X Tribe X,” “X Blue Eyes X,” “X Gamins X,”
“My dearest Alice,” etc., some of which are signed “Cygne,” others
“Egypte,” and the rest with the initials of name in full. His first
advertisement (No. 245) appeared in 1851, and from that date they
appeared continually during a period of six years. They ceased for a
time, but commenced again in the year 1857. He seems to have been an
unfortunate man, and evidently lost not only his fortune, but his
daughter Alice, and his numerous appeals in the “Agony Column” are a
curious mixture of business complications and entreaties for his lost
child’s return. That his child was not lost by accident, but stolen by
some one of evil intent, cannot fail to be apparent to even the most
careless of my readers. One cannot help feeling an amount of sympathy
with this unfortunate writer as we read advertisements No. 995, 1001,
and 1034, in which we learn what a large share of anxiety and suffering
fell to his lot. The last of his advertisements appeared in 1870 (No.
1753), but unfortunately we cannot learn from its contents whether or
not the tide of misfortune had turned for him at last.

The other remarkable series of advertisements to which I alluded are
those signed “J. de W.” There is little doubt that mankind inherited a
large amount of curiosity from our mother Eve; therefore advertisements,
written in the ordinary intelligent manner, though they may be full of
interest and amusement, do not strike us as forcibly as those couched in
an unintelligible style like the ones to which I am now referring, and
simply from the fact that we are unable to read them. For five years “J.
de W.’s” advertisements appeared on or about the first of every month,
commencing March 1st, 1850; and, as we follow them, we can conjure up
for ourselves the stirring history and romance of a lifetime. It is
somewhat difficult to determine whether or not the advertisements,
written in the same type and signed “A. B. C.,” are answers to the
others. It is quite possible that “J. de W.” might be able to receive
letters without interference, but had no means of sending them without
detection, and was therefore reduced to the medium of the _Times_. It
seems quite impossible that any man, though possessed of unbounded faith
and perseverance, would have struggled against fate so long. Would he
not have given up in despair years before he did? So I think we may
conclude that the messages signed “J. de W.” and “A. B. C.” are answers
one to the other.

I have been able to show so many different ways in which our simple
alphabet can be changed to form a language that will defy a large
majority of the public, that I feel sure that all those who are denied
the privilege of an open correspondence, might, with a little ingenuity,
find a way of communication that would baffle those whose eyes they
fear; but at the same time let them remember that parents, guardians,
and friends will have discovered in my pages that what looks so
unintelligible at first sight may, with a little patience, be read as
easily as the plainest English printed in our newspapers.




THE AGONY COLUMN

OF THE “TIMES.”


1.--_Monday, January 13, 1800._

THE ANSWER of a LETTER to an OFFICER at HEREFORD is, “That he Was.”


2.--_Thursday, December 18, 1800._

A CARD.--If the Lady who a Gentleman handed into her carriage from
Covent Garden Theatre, on Wednesday, the third of this month, will
oblige the Advertiser with a line to Z. Z., Spring Garden Coffee House,
saying if married or single, she will quiet the mind of a young
Nobleman, who has tried, but in vain, to find the Lady. The carriage was
ordered to Bond Street. The Lady may depend on honour and secrecy.
Nothing but the most honourable interview is intended. The Lady was in
mourning, and sufficiently cloathed to distinguish her for possessing
every virtue and charm that man could desire in a female that he would
make choice of for a Wife. Deception will be detected, as the Lady’s
person can never be forgot.


3.--_Saturday, May 16, 1801._

ELIZA’S Second LETTER has been received. The Inserter of this candidly
acknowledges a pre-engagement; but if “Eliza” wishes for further
explanation, she will please to address herself to the Inserter’s
Father.


4.--_Wednesday, July 15, 1801._

TO ELIZA.--It is with deep regret the Person feels himself again called
upon publicly to address ELIZA on the subject of her very unpleasant
Letters, after repeated solicitations to discontinue them. He is
perfectly satisfied in his own mind to have acted honourably towards
her, for her peace of mind sake has candidly and unreservedly made known
to her his situation, consequently she well knows he cannot in honour,
even if he were disposed, accede to her wishes. It is useless for her
therefore to trouble him with more, or to write elsewhere, as she may
rest assured, from him they will meet with the fate of the two last,
which were committed to the flames unopened, and likewise in the other
quarter, the contempt they justly merit.


5.--_Tuesday, December 15, 1801._

MATRIMONY.--The friend of a Gentleman (a Bachelor), about 26, who is a
Man of good property, agreeable person, and in an old-established
profitable Business in one of the best and most fashionable streets at
the West-end of the Town, wishes to see him made happy by an honourable
union with an amiable Female of good education, pleasing manners, and
some property. This Advertisement is inserted by his Friend without his
knowledge, by which means he hopes to introduce a Lady to his wishes,
and prevent the possibility of prejudice on his part by this too common
channel of information. Any Lady (Widow or Spinster) not exceeding 30
years of age, who may answer this Advertisement (not out of curiosity
only), may depend on secrecy, and the greatest honour and most
respectable reference, by addressing a line to Mr. Thomas Price, to be
left at the Printing-office, Grocer’s Hall-court, Poultry.


6.--_Tuesday, December 22, 1801._

TO a LADY.--The GENTLEMAN who lately received TWO LETTERS from a Lady,
is extremely sorry that the first did not reach him in time to avail
himself of its contents, and thereby escape the Rebuke contained in the
second. He will shortly be obliged to leave Town in a few months for
Ireland. If this should meet the eye of his Fair Correspondent, he hopes
she will honour him with another, directed as the last, between this and
Saturday.


7.--_Thursday, December 31, 1801._

IF the GENTLEMAN (supposed a Foreigner) who kindly took a YOUNG LADY
from No. 13, Charlotte-street, Rathbone-Place, to Bristol, the beginning
of September last, will appoint a Place and Time of Meeting with the
Advertiser, whose discretion and secrecy may be depended upon, it may be
attended with real benefit to the young Lady. Direct to D. G., at John’s
Coffee-house, Cornhill.


8.--_Thursday, December 23, 1802._

INCOGNITA’S elegant and well-composed EPISTLE, of the 19th instant, has
had all the impression that possibly could be expected: another, with
real name and place of abode, may be safely ventured. An immediate
intercourse is earnestly requested by

  LEANDER.


9.--_Wednesday, December 28, 1803._

MATRIMONY.--A TRADESMAN, in a pleasant part of London, wishes to meet
with a PARTNER for LIFE. A handsome face is not so much his wish as an
agreeable, prudent Person; a Widow would not be objected to if her age
did not much exceed his own, which is under 30. Some fortune is
expected. A line to A. B., under cover to Mr. Woffington, No. 41,
Lombard-street, post paid, will meet with the strictest honour and
secrecy.


10.--_Monday, February 13, 1804._

A. B. C.


11.--_Saturday, June 16, 1804._

TO M----A M----E. “Forget” you? By Heaven I cannot! Engraven on my soul
is your memory, in deepest characters, which time vainly will endeavour
to efface, contracted as now must be its span, since without one
remonstrance, one expostulation, you can resolve for ever to forget me.
Wherefore, then, often warned, persist in exciting a reluctant, indeed,
but never more unfeigned, sensibility, only to wound it? DO I DESERVE
THIS? Is it generous? Is it equitable? But severe no longer, welcome
now, is the mandate of authority, enjoining oblivion of

  ORL----O.


12.--_Tuesday, September 4, 1804._

A CARD.--H. J. A. presents his most respectful compliments to the
Catholic Widow Lady, residing near London-bridge, and earnestly requests
a speedy interview. Should this meet the Lady’s, or any of the family’s
eyes, it is for obvious reasons desired that this may meet the attention
which the nearest relationship pleads for. An answer, addressed to the
Blossoms Inn, Lawrence-lane, Cheapside, will be attended to.


13.--_Friday, September 21, 1804._

IF the YOUTH THAT LEFT ISLINGTON on Sunday evening can remember that he
ever had a Mother, he is informed he will soon be deprived of that
blessing, except he immediately writes with particulars, or personally
appears before her. His friend will redress any circumstance, and settle
every point to his satisfaction.

  WEST SMITHFIELD.


14.--_Wednesday, October 10, and Thursday, October 11, 1804._

THE LETTER of J. A. has been received this morning: the person to whom
it was addressed will be happy to receive a further communication, and
assures the writer that everything friendship can dictate will be done
for him if he will send a line where a letter may be addressed to him:
he thinks it needless to pledge his honour that secrecy will be
observed, and his own inclinations alone be consulted.

  OCTOBER 9th, 1804.


15.--_Friday, January 10, 1806._

B.


16.--_Thursday, February 6, 1806._

A.


17.--_Monday, December 29, 1806._

TO D. P.--IN ANSWER to D. P.’s note, the sum proposed is 3000_l._, which
will be lodged in the hands of his Banker, or any one else he may
appoint. The next, addressed to Newmarket, will be duly attended to.


18.--_Wednesday, May 13, 1807._

A CARD.--If Mr. A., who had such a delightful Row to Battersea, on
Monday, the 27th of last month, will call or write, everything can be
explained to his satisfaction.


19.--_Friday, July 3, 1807._

MR. T. BARRALET begs leave to remind his Friends who knew him thirty
years ago, that he is alive and in good health.--South Lambeth, July 2.


20.--_Monday, May 22, 1809._

IF the LADY who met a CLERGYMAN in the Greenwich Coach, on Thursday, May
18, will send her address at Somers Town, to Rev. W. J., at the Turk’s
Head Coffee-house in the Strand, she may accomplish the declared object
of her wishes immediately.


21.--_Tuesday, December 25, 1810._

A LADY who passed a Gentleman on Monday, the 17th of this month, in
Hart-street, Bloomsbury, about 3 o’clock in the afternoon, without
speaking to him, is anxious for an opportunity of seeing him again, any
time after the 7th of January.


22.--_Tuesday, September 10, 1811._

IF the Gentleman who met a LADY in Gracechurch-street, on the evening of
the 9th of November last, and walked with her to the lower end of
Bishopgate-street, and then waited till her return, and then accompanied
her into the City, will be at the exact spot where he waited for her, at
8 o’clock on Wednesday and Thursday next, she will meet him, having
something of importance to communicate.

  SEPTEMBER 9, 1811.


23.--_Friday, March 31, 1815._

A. B.’s LETTER is acknowledged with thanks, and further information is
solicited most earnestly; no expense or labour will be spared in the
pursuit of that justice which has hitherto been sought in vain; honour
and secrecy may be relied on always.


24.--_Thursday, November 7, 1816._

PHILIP.--Would PHILIP like to hear of his MOTHER’S DEATH?


25.--_Monday, April 27, 1818._

G. B.--If every manly feeling is not extinct in you, you will return
directly. It is false shame to leave a woman to combat difficulties that
you could not withstand. You are vilified, as if you were a bad man, and
that by persons whose indulgence you might expect. Your presence may
reverse what has been done. It will relieve those who love you, from
distress the most unutterable.--April 27.

  R.


26.--_Thursday, May 7, and May 14, 1818._

G. B.--If you could conceive the sorrow and despair into which I am
plunged, I am sure you would at last let me hear from you; this
unkindness distracts me more than all the rest; with you I could suffer
every privation; your absence only aggravates our miseries; you have
still friends left, whose kindness can obliterate past recollections.

  S. B.


27.--_Monday, March 22, 1819._

E. Z. is particularly expected; he will find a Letter in
Cheapside.--Saturday morning, March 20, 1819.


28.--_Tuesday, July 6, 1819._

F. K. B.--RECEIVED.


29.--_Wednesday, September 6, 1820._

“’TIS WELL.” H. H.--London, September 4, 1820.


30.--_Thursday, September 21, 1820._

H. H. begs leave to acknowledge receipt of J. A.’s communication, and to
inform him, that he need not hesitate in naming the harbour and using
his own oars.--London, September 1, 1820.


31.--_Monday, April 2, 1821._

A. B.--B. U.--C. T. * * * A. A.--E. E.--E. F. * * * F. A. * * * E. A.
* * * A. S. A. T.--B. U.


32.--_Thursday, August 2, 1821._

E. A. * * * A. F.--E. H. * * * F. C.--B. V. * * * A. B.--B. A. E. T.--A.
R.--C. R. * * * F. E.--B. L.--C. O. * * * A. 6--E. J.--b--E. G.--in--C.
X.


33.--_Friday, March 7, 1823._

B. in the City, is particularly desirous to know the Possessor of the
following motto--“Je mours on je m’attache.”


34.--_Tuesday, April 1, 1823._

E. A. * * * F. A. * * * F. G. * B. L. * * * A. R. * A. U. * A. W. * B.
G.


35.--_Saturday, May 3, 1823._

A. J. * E. E. * E. F. * * * A. B. * E. J. * B. A. * C. 3. * * * E. A.
* * * F. C. * C. F. * * *


36.--_Saturday, May 24, 1823._

L. S.--Why do you not RETURN the PURSE?--May 23.


37.--_Wednesday, September 3, 1823._

F. B. * C. R. * * * A. L. * C. Q. * E. H. * * * E. B. * A. J. * * * A.
J. * E. D. * * * F. E. * C. Q. * * * A. S. * A. T. * E. T. * B. T. * C.
P. * * * A. T. * E. E. * * *


38.--_Wednesday, September 24, 1823._

HAZARD & Co.--TO-MORROW.


39.--_Friday, October 3, 1823._

A. B. * E. T. * B. W. * E. J. * B. T. * C. S. * E. J. * B. A. * C. T.
* * * A. J. * E. C. * * * A. T. * E. E. * * * F. B. * C. G. * * * F. F.
* C. R. * * * F. G. * B. V. * C. T. * * * E. B. * A. J. * * *


40.--_Thursday, January, 1824._

E. A. * * * E. B. * A. J. * E. E. * * * A. Z. * E. H. * C. R. * * * F.
C. * B. F. * C. M. * * * F. E. * C. O. * C. Q. * C. T. * E. W. * * * F.
G. * B. V. * C. B. * * *


41.--_Saturday, January 31, 1824._

F. A. * * * A. J. * E. C. * * * A. Q. * A. R. * A. U. * A. W. * B. U.
* * * A. B. * B. A. * * * F. E. * C. B. * * * F. C. * B. F. * C. M.
* * * F. F. * C. A. * * * A. L. * E. H. * C. P. * * *


42.--_Wednesday, March 3, 1824._

“Z. AGAIN.--CASE UNTRUE.”


43.--_Wednesday, March 24, 1824._

Z.


44.--_Wednesday, May 26, 1824._

R.--YES.--What was required has been done, but the Advertiser earnestly
solicits that the affair may drop; there is risk without use. No news is
good news, he requests only to know when an union has taken place.


45.--_Saturday, November 6, 1824._

JOE to JACK.--SURRENDER!


46.--_Thursday, November 11, 1824._

The Anonymous Writer can have no copy of his first Letter. “Ruinous
exposure” are not words in course. He must drop his mask, or forfeit his
self-respect. Having seized upon the judgement-seat, he should know no
rest till he has traced the accusation through all its windings, till he
either by proof establishes, or, in his own person, absolutely acquits
from that “claim” which is most unequivocally denied. Let him “reflect
then.” The wanton cruelty imputed, even in his last letter, would leave
a stain never to be effaced.


47.--_Friday, December 2, 1825._

“CÆSAR BORGIA.”--Labor improbus omnia vincit. W. L. R. nunc 30. Brompton
row.


48.--_Thursday, May 4, 1826._

I CONSENT to any, every condition, rather than a continuance of this
lengthened--this too justly dreaded--separation.


49.--_Monday, May 8, and May 9, 1826._

I CONSENT to everything that can be suggested to procure a
reconciliation, which I have for a long period anxiously desired.


50.--_Friday, May 12, 1826._

I ENTREAT YOU to KEEP to YOUR WORD, or it may be fatal. Laws were made
to bind the villains of society.


51.--_Monday, May 15, 1826._

COUNTERSIGN.--Letters from me to you are not safe. Depend upon my
secrecy and honour. Fare thee well.


52.--_Tuesday, May 16, 1826._

RESPECTFULLY; Confidence has been betrayed.


53.--_Monday, June 5, 1826._

MEMORANDUM.--Suspicions are unfounded.--Slanders from Hypocrites and
story-tellers ought not to be credited--no unknown circumstance can be
credited.


54.--_Wednesday, September 30, 1829._

IF the GENTLEMAN, whose conversation was interrupted a fortnight ago (by
an exclamation of--“Sir, you will lose your handkerchief,” and also by a
carriage driving suddenly into Portland-place), wishes to renew it, he
will find the curiosity that then lay dormant has since been excited,
therefore the information volunteered, if he has not left town, may be
sent to C. D., twopenny post-office, 88, Oxford-street.


55.--_Thursday, September 30, 1830._

TO L----A.--It is impossible to approve or justify the step L----a has
taken. How much unhappiness her conduct has occasioned, and still
occasions, cannot be conceived. All that remains to those whom she has
so deeply afflicted is to lament that any one brought up in a knowledge
of the duties of virtue and religion could ever be induced to depart so
widely from what they enjoin.


56.--_Friday, February 11, 1831._

Z. may make the experiments to which he alludes in his letter in the
presence of H. M. C. without fear of endangering his personal safety.


57.--_Wednesday, November 6, 1833._

W. D. is informed that his RESOLVE was, as delicately as possible, duly
communicated, and that the same was received with as much fortitude as
could be expected. The children are well, and their mother, though very
wretched, yet as composed as under the painful circumstances she could
be. W. D. is requested to write again, giving a detailed account on a
particular subject, from his new residence, when decided upon.


58.--_Tuesday, February 14, 1837._

H.


59.--_Saturday, June 3, and June 5 and 6, 1837._

“I DO.” London.


60.--_Thursday, June 8, 1837._

E. O. L. THANKS C. K. V. The circumstance was by direction, but seems to
have been overdone.


61.--_Saturday June 10, 1837._

WISH, but CANNOT YET. All kind. M. R.


62.--_Thursday, July 27, 1837._

H. Has not the slightest desire to act contrary to a wish expressed in
the manner it has been, had such been the intention, which it never was.
H. wishes it to be understood that, were some points cleared up, every
feeling, once expressed, would be felt the same even now. H. hopes that
this may yet be done; it would give extreme pleasure.


63.--_Thursday, October 18, 1838._

THOU wert bidden to eat of my bread, and to drink of my cup--come, they
shall be made sweet to thee, thy name is safe and ever dear--come, come
quickly, I will GIVE and thou shalt ENJOY, be thou yet RETAINED to cheer
a blighted home.


64.--_Saturday, October 12, 1839._

DOES R. A. wish to FORM an ALLIANCE with the LADY? If so, his parents
will consent. WRITE.


65.--_Wednesday, November 6, 1839._

EXTRACT from LETTER, dated November 1, 1839.--“All that I have to say,
however, is for you to write directly to Lady * * * * * * * *. Return
without a moment’s loss of time, and all will be adjusted.


66.--_Tuesday, September 22, 1840._

“W. E. J. S.--£100.”


67.--_Saturday, May 7, 1842._

J. H. REJECTS the FIRST Proposition of T. U., and will avail himself of
the second. As to T. U.’s inquiry, J. H. aver “No.”


68.--_Wednesday, July 13, 1842._

C. * * * * * * may implicitly rely upon the honour and SECRECY of his
friend, and that his only intention is to oblige and befriend. C. should
know his friend better than to imagine that any form of words would more
effectually bind the man, whose Christian and surname each contain six
letters.


69.--_Thursday, December 1, 1842._

GLANVILLE.--16 4872 3648 19 692 1843 2635 3586 186 496 369 471 702 1843
938a 4362z 4000 19 500 317 582 3000 5000 958 1000.--Nov. 28, 1842.


70.--_Thursday, December 15, 1842._

GLANVILLE.--16 -- 4, 872 -- 940c -- 5, 923+ -- 4000 -- 19 -- 888 -- 753
-- 116 -- 853 -- 973 -- 1,001 -- 989 -- 777 -- 4,321 -- 3,521+ --
666.--Dec. 10, 1842.


71.--_Friday, December 30, 1842._

GLANVILLE.--479y. -- 511 -- 208 -- 78 -- 3,482 -- 6,834 -- 397 -- 10,156
-- 3,421 -- 5,216 -- 3,111.--Dec. 29, 1842.


72.--_Friday, February 3, 1843._

MARCH 3rd.--W. C. M.


73.--_Friday, April 21, 1843._

GLANVILLE.--937 -- 64 -- 5,201 -- 999 -- 86 -- 8,217 -- 982 -- 42 --
3,333 -- 767 -- 54 -- 1,923 -- 4,800 -- 8,619.--April 20, 1843.


74.--_Friday, April 28, 1843._

GLANVILLE.--236 -- 13 -- 98 -- 7468 -- 1313 -- 649 -- 4434 -- 63 -- 114
-- 829 -- 7464 -- 11 -- 108 -- 97 -- 466 -- 13 -- 49 -- 38½ -- 189 --
40.--April 26, 1843.


75.--_Wednesday, May 10, 1843._

AN ELDERLY LADY.--No. Another tribute is in progress.


76.--_Wednesday, May 31, 1843._

CORUNNA.--RIGHT, LEFT.


77.--_Thursday, June 1, 1843._

A NEWFOUNDLAND DOG HAS TEETH.


78.--_Tuesday, October 3, 1843._

GLANVILLE.--42 -- 888 -- 222 -- 18 -- 699 -- 47 -- 382 476 -- 908 -- 73
-- 47 -- 1,667 -- 999 -- 17 -- 31 -- 897 -- 464 -- 23 -- 909 -- 1,763 --
48 -- 551 -- 49 -- 15 -- 86.--Sept. 27, 1843.


79.--_Wednesday, October 4, 1843._

GLANVILLE.--809 : 61 : 4371 : 15 : 86 : 312 : 9403 : 60 : 848 : 219 :
104 : 67 : 8333 : 471 : 3 : 888 : 769 : 12 : 222 : 18 : 999.--October 3.


80.--_Saturday, March 9, 1844._

M. A. E.--DISSATISFIED.


81.--_Thursday, March 28, 1844._

“BROKEN PROMISES MAKE FAITHLESS FRIENDS.”--A worthier spirit actuates
the writer of this, and the persons whom he saw to-day for a brief space
are invited to honour him with an INTERVIEW, either at the spot where
they met, or at that where he a second time saw them. Respectful
sympathy, and all the aid in his power, are his objects in making this
request.--Wednesday.


82.--_Friday, November 1, 1844._

YOURS, &c., No. 3.


83.--_Monday, December 2, 1844._

YOURS, &c., No. 5.


84.--_Wednesday, January 1, 1845._

YOURS, &c., No. 7.


85.--_Saturday, February 1, 1845._

YOURS, &c., No. 8.


86.--_Saturday, March 1, 1845._

YOURS, &c., No. 10.


87.--_Tuesday, April 1, 1845._

YOURS, &c., No. 12. (Stopped by orders from Le Père.)--NOTHING whatever
has ARRIVED here from you, save what you sent to me from M---- and
M----’s. All depends on your fidelity and courage.--G----M.


88.--_Saturday, April 12, 1845._

THE SECRET shall be KEPT.--H. M. Friday, April 11.


89.--_Saturday, April 26, 1845._

L. H. S--KEEP UP YOUR SPIRITS. I will stand by you. April 24, 1845.


90.--_Friday, May 2, 1845._

YOURS, &c., No.--(See April.) Mrs. M.’s LETTER has arrived.


91.--_Monday, June 2, 1845._

YOURS, &c., No.--See April.


92.--_Saturday, June 21, 1845._

S. B. “is a STRICT Disciplinarian, and not afraid of a rather unruly
Pupil.”


93.--_Tuesday, July 1, 1845._

YOURS, &c., No. 16.--See April.--YOUR COMMUNICATIONS have been RECEIVED.
There is nothing to forgive, but only to regret.


94.--_Friday, July 25, 1845._

R. B., £2, GREENWICH.--BE QUICK.


95.--_Friday, August 1, 1845._

YOURS, &c., No.--.--. See July.


96.--_Monday, September 1, 1845._

YOURS, &c., No.--. See July.


97.--_Wednesday, October 1, 1845._

YOURS, &c., No.--. See July.


98.--_Tuesday, October 7-8-9-10, 1845._

IT is a common fault with many to “suspect most where they can prove
least.”--J. H. G.


99.--_Wednesday, November 26, 1845._

T. P.--Nos. 36 295, 17396, 04692.


100.--_Saturday, December 13, 1845._

DIE DEUTSCHE SPRACHE.


101.--_Monday, February 2, 1846._

B. M. to C. S. swears solemnly to keep his secret inviolate.


102.--_Friday, February 27, 1846._

ON my honour I’ll do as you said in yr. letter--B. to S. R.


103.--_Friday, March 20, 1846._

MAY 7, 1844.--Yr. order, Sir, is rather cool, like yrself, and yr.
adopted country; nevertheless, it shall be obeyed. Your brother is
dead--died on the 6th of April, 1844, of cholera.


104.--_Saturday, April 18, 1846._

“VATES” has LEFT “The ERA.”


105.--_Monday, April 20, 1846._

“THE ERA” has LEFT “VATES.”


106.--_Wednesday, July 29, 1846._

D. D. D.--Yes--for all the documents as stated before.


107.--_Wednesday, October 7, 1846._

B. NEW***STONE.--“There is no incense that doth reach to heaven with
such sweet fragrance from the shrine of prayers as gratitude for
mercies.”


108.--_Wednesday, November 4, 1846._

WITH never-ending regret I own my rash error. The withdrawal of yr.
future notice must seriously injure me, yet I deserve it, and humbly
pray that He who knows to “err is human,” will pardon me, soften yr.
heart, and make you happy.


109.--_Saturday, November 14, 1846._

“TO err is human.” RETURN or WRITE.--Je.


110.--_Friday, January 29, 1847._

H. J. F.--Use the utmost diligence; “avoid excitement.”


111.--_Wednesday, February 10-11-12, 1847._

W. W. must PROCEED.


112.--_Monday, February 15, 1847._

W. WILL PROCEED. Thanks.


113.--_Saturday, April 10, 1847._

RUFFTUM--WRITE to ADAM, or POOR old Joseph.


114.--_Saturday, May 1, 1847._

CAROL.--Remember, if unable, WRITE.--May 1.


115.--_Friday, June 25, 1847._

THIS is NOT the Opportunity.--“REFUSES.”


116.--_Saturday, July 17, 1847._

NOTICE.--“3rd of May, 1845”--London, July 16, 1847.


117.--_Saturday, October 2, 1847._

O. Z. Why should O. Z. abandon all; his case is not hopeless. J. & A.
must have an INTERVIEW.


118.--_Monday, November 8, 1847._

D. D. It has COME; I see no other course; consider it again; against yr.
wishes I will not press it. Remember ever what I told you, that the
relationship exists.


119.--_Friday, December 10, 1847._

DEAR FITZY, yr. presence is REQUIRED IMMEDIATELY. Delay not a moment.
The little birds, nutmegs, silver beaks, &c., greet you.--Mov.


120.--_Thursday, December 30, 1847._

MASS.--How could I write, I have not heard since the 11th December. She
has left, but will not go till after the 12th of January.--L. L. B.


121.--_Saturday, March 4, 1848._

TO E****.--Your POETICAL EPISTLES of 1846, 1847, and that of the present
year, have been safely RECEIVED. Their originality is greatly admired.
The party to whom these letters are addressed adopts the medium of this
journal to express his thanks to his fair but unknown correspondent for
the interest she appears to take in him. E**** is entreated not to carry
into effect the threat conveyed by the concluding lines of her last
poem.--B. P. Feb. 15, 1848.


122.--_Tuesday, March 21, 1848._

I Hereby APOLOGIZE for having wounded the feelings of a parent, and beg
to express my regret at what has occurred.--O. L.--Monday, March 20,
1848.


123.--_Saturday, May 20, 1848._

IF O WRITES any more he will be SHOWN UP.


124.--_Monday, May 22, 1848._

PENITEUS.--BEYOND HOPE or CHANCE.


125.--_Tuesday, September 12, 1848._

TO ----. Though every hope were blasted, the worst news would be
preferable to this cruel and lengthened suspense.--September 11, 1848.


126.--_Wednesday, September 13, 1848._

F. P. S. M.


127.--_Friday, September 15, 1848._

M. R.--August 21 (named in yr. note), £218 14_s._ 6_d._ August 21.
CHANGED ALL.--B. M.


128.--_Saturday, September 16, 1848._

R. Z.----89.--TWO DULY RECEIVED.--H. H.--September 15, 1848.


129.--_Saturday, September 23, 1848._

TO “INTEREST.”--To numbers 1, 5, 6, 7, & 8, Yes; to numbers 2, 5 feet 8½
inches; and to number 9, No.--X. Y. Z.


130.--_Friday, September 29, 1848._

ZILE is BETTER. Dodson and Fogg have the things and I think will bring
the affair to a satisfactory conclusion. My next letter will be directed
further on.--Mugger.


131.--_Friday, October 20, 1848._

NOVEMBER was NAMED. Will that explain?--B.--


132.--_Monday, October 30, 1848._

TO C. C. E.--The REPORT is totally False. There has been a sale of
furniture lately at the private house that I left eight months ago.


133--_Monday, November 13, 1848._

ALFRED.--Affairs are looking dark, but I will explain on Thursday.


134.--_Saturday, November 25, 1848._

YES. Address, 49, B. S. D. R.


135.--_Thursday, December 14, 1848._

NO.--To-morrow, where we last parted, 6 p.m.--R. S.


136.--_Monday, December 18, 1848._

WELCOME the Family Friend.


137.--_Tuesday, December 19, 1848._

YOU know my wishes, my ardent wishes--what more can I say or do? I am
ill and powerless, but as well disposed as ever. Why not arrange
matters?--B. M. T. A.


138.--_Monday, January 1, 1849._

TO A FRIEND.--All the GOOD WISHES that a real and sincerely heartfelt
affection for you can dictate are OFFERED at this season.


139.--_Tuesday, January 2, 1849._

TO C. P. A.--Your affectionate friend has no other means but to appeal
in this way to your generous heart. Pity and forgive. Forget yr. pride
and unkindness with the past year. May health and happiness for ever
attend you. Bear no grudge, and add not contempt to his silent grief by
a dead cut.--January 1, 1849.


140.--_Thursday, January 4, 1849._

A FRIEND’S Reply.--The expressions addressed “To a Friend” on New
Year’s-day, are deeply valued by him, and are interpreted as an
acknowledgment and virtual approbation of a letter which he wrote you in
November last, signed with his initials. Your reply can be signified by
advertisement or the post.


141.--_Thursday, January 11, 1849._

TO WALTER.--I am LOST (if you please).--Zion. Poet’s-corner, Westminster
Abbey.


142.--_Friday, January 12, 1849._

TO ZION, Poet’s-corner, Westminster.--If Walter refuses write to J. B.,
King’s newspaper office, Chancery-lane, who wishes most particularly to
see you.


143.--_Thursday, January 25, 1849._

V. A.--“There is a tide,” &c. Yours, F.


144.--_Monday, February 5-& 6-7-8-9-10, 1849._

TORQUAY.--ONE LINE, no matter what its import, is asked by one on the
verge of distraction. Silence may be thought more merciful, but it is
mistaken kindness to suppose so.


145.--_Wednesday, February 7, 1849._

D. V.--Would my DEAREST FRIEND honour me with some indubitable proof of
my position?--F.----a.


146.--_Wednesday, February 21, 1849._

F. F.--IS KNOWN. B. trusts they are happier than they so kindly but
erroneously imagine B. to be. F. F. will write again as before; but
directed Mr. B., who when this is read will be where F. F. once wished
to be.--Farewell.


147.--_Wednesday, February 21 and March 1-2-3-5-6-7-8-9-10-12-13-14-15,
1849._

TORQUAY.--A person, who is much interested in the ADVERTISEMENT which
appeared in this paper relating to the above place, is extremely anxious
to have some FURTHER PARTICULARS, which may serve as a guide.


148.--_Friday, March 16, 1849._

ABERGAVENNY.--Everything is intelligible.--FOUR.--March 14th.


149.--_Wednesday, March 21, 1849._

TO JENNY, GREENWICH, county of Kent.--Two C. C.’s.--


150.--_Wednesday, March 21, 1849._

ABERGAVENNY.--Everything is intelligible. One. March 21.


151.--_Saturday, March 24, 1849._

NO DOORMAT TO-NIGHT.


152.--_Saturday, March 24, 1849._

IF the ONE mentioned yesterday is the First, I am really glad
circumstances are so well known, and sincerely wish something could be
done to alleviate this dreadful suspense. A direct communication would
be perfectly safe.--FOURTH and SIXTH.


153.--_Tuesday, March 27, 1849._

TO E. C. W.--Content.--J. P.


154.--_Wednesday, March 28, 1849._

ABERGAVENNY.--Everything is Intelligible.--One--a An Interview is
urgent. Express, 27th of March.


155.--_Friday, March 30, 1849._

ABERGAVENNY.--An interview or a speedy answer is urgent. Express--29th
March.


156.--_Friday, March 30, 1849._

MOST EARNESTLY as --l and --r DESIRE an INTERVIEW --l fears he dare not
venture further, as the authenticity of the communication is open to
doubt and the distance so great he may imperil his highest hopes. --l
and --r entreat you will not withdraw yr. attention from the Fourth and
Sixth.


157.--_Thursday, April 5, 1849._

WHILE “Bitter Wrong” remains unredressed, even the gold of California
would be profitless as “Slate Stanes.”

    “The Wrong must be Right,
    “And the Dark must be Light,”

Ere Heaven will smile again.--DRN ZWYANUNM.


158.--_Monday, April 9, 1849._

WHILE “Bitter Wrong” remains unredressed, even the gold of California
would be profitless as “Slate Stanes.”

    “The Wrong must be Right,
    “And the Dark must be Light,”

Ere Heaven will smile again.--Years have not mitigated the torture, DIE
ZIGEUNERINN.


159.--_Tuesday, April 10, 1849._

ABERGAVENNY-- FOUR -- T -- 8th April.


160.--_Tuesday, April 17, 1849._

THE BARON is open to MEET ALL THE WORLD for any amount a side. The
stakes will be forthcoming at the old place on April 29, 1849, at 6.


161.--_Wednesday, April 25, 1849._

“RIEN AU--DELA.”--Geneviève et Louise. Avril 23, 1849.


162.--_Thursday, April 26, 1849._

T. Y. Z.--A month ago. A LETTER is where you wished.--M.


163.--_Saturday, May 5, 1849._

STOP THAT PIANO.--J. P.


164.--_Tuesday, May 8, 1849._

TORQUAY.--Let there be no more mistakes. If this advertisement is
answered all is well.


165.--_Thursday, May 10, 1849._

LOUISE.--D. E., Mai 9.


166.--_Friday, May 11, 1849._

LOUISE.--D. E., May 10.--GEDULD und HOFFNUNG.


167.--_Friday, May 25, 1849._

MARIE.--Mai 23.


168.--_Wednesday, June 6, 1849._

TORQUATUS.--RESURGAM.


169.--_Saturday, June 9, 1849._

MARIE, LOUISE et GENEVIÈVE, Juin 7.


170.--_Tuesday, June 12, 1849._

LINCOLN.--TUESDAY.


171.--_Wednesday, June 13, 1849._

B**EKS, COME FORWARD like a man, and frankly state the whole, and not
act so cowardly. An arrangement is possible.--De Beauvoir, June 9, 1849.


172.--_Friday, June 22, 1849._

MARIET, June 20. Quelques jours seulement.


173.--_Saturday, June 23, 1849._

DOULAMICUS, I WILL.


174.--_Friday, June 29, 1849._

CLIEVE or A.--27th June.


175.--_Friday, July 13, 1849._

MARINE.--AT NEITHER.--NUL.--July 11.


176.--_Monday, July 16, 1849._

MARINE.--AT EITHER.--BILL.


177.--_Saturday, July 21, 1849._

GENEVIÈVE.--Si, après la semaine prochaine.--Juillet 18.


178.--_Tuesday, July 24, 1849._

S. R.--July 22.


179.--_Wednesday, July 25, 1849._

GENEVIÈVE.--Oui, il est arrivé.--Juillet 23.


180.--_Wednesday, August 1, and September 1, 1849._

ALL WELL in BRUNSWICK.


181.--_Friday, August 3, 1849._

JEAN.--Très bien:--August 2.


182.--_Thursday, August 16, 1849._

LOUISE.--Attendez.--Août 16.*


183.--_Monday, August 20, 1849._

RUNAWAY.--Come to the bosom of yr. best friend--it bleeds for you, and
will receive you without reproach. Come immediately. If means are wanted
they shall be supplied.--August 18.


184.--_Tuesday, August 21, 1849._

GENEVIÈVE.--Ayez de l’ESPERANCE.--Août 20.


185.--_Thursday, August 23, 1849._

OU NE LE MERITE PAS.--Août 21, 1849. N. K. S.


186.--_Tuesday, August 28, 1849._

LOUISE.--Ou le voit bien, mais ou n’y pense pas à présent.--Août 27.--D.
E.


187.--_Saturday, September 15, 1849._

LOUISE de K. S.--GEDULD und HOFFNUNG. September 13.--R. L.


188.--_Thursday, October 4, 1849._

ONE.--YES. 2.--Yes, If I should fail.--ALFRED.


189.--_Monday, October 8, 1849._

ALFRED.


190.--_Tuesday, October 9, 1849._

IT IS ALL OFF.--R.


191.--_Wednesday, October 10, 1849._

MARIE LOUISE.--D. K. Vous avez bien raison de n’avoir point de
peur.--Normandie. Octobre 8.


192.--_Tuesday, November 20, 1849._

DIVER is WELL, and gone with his friends to Paris.


193.--_Saturday, December 8, 1849._

MR. DOLDRUM has ARRIVED.


194.--_Thursday, January 10, 1850._

B. J. under consideration. Why make such a selection of two names?


195.--_Tuesday, January 15, 1850._

A. B.--ALL is WELL. Be on yr. guard against the two persons you heard of
on the 13th. They neither of them understand the case, especially the
first. Thomas is in Town. God bless you.


196.--_Saturday, February 16, 1850._

IF the Intentions of M. N. R. are honourable, the person his letter was
addressed to will be grateful for any disclosures, as she has already
suspected the villany he hints at. A further COMMUNICATION immediately,
addressed to 29, Half-Moon Street, Piccadilly, is requested, and the
secrecy demanded may be implicitly relied on.


197.--_Wednesday, February 20, 1850._

YOURS TRULY, and most obliged.--I feel that you wished to leave me in a
good position. It is not so. Let me shortly hear from you, and your
confidence shall not be abused, and all may yet be right.


198.--_Tuesday, February 26, 1850._

HEARTHRUG CLUB.--The “MYTH” is requested to Return to his disconsolate
friends.


199.--_Wednesday, February 27, 1850._

HEARTHRUG CLUB.--Faith, Corporal, you’ll kill me with yr. wit and
learning. Have you returned to yr. canteen?--not Hearthrug Club.--Spare
me. Good bye.--H. C.


200.--_Friday, March 1, 1850._

NO ONE.--S. lmpi. F. npi. C. qgnl. mkgn. F. ngli. lokg. pil. S. nlgi. F.
nmkl. B. qgip. F. hkom. C. gknp. Sh.--ll. Capn. A. F. ngli. rkpg. C.
kpn. F. pil. ogq. kmol. knpo. hkom. hqon. iokg. C. on F. pil. Eider F.
hqlk. npmh. qmkl. pil. S. mng. F. orph. rhmn. E. nolp. F. lgoq. mqho.
olhi. C. hgo. F. iqkg. S. pgqm.--J. de W.


201.--_Wednesday, March 6, 1850._

FRIDAY EVENING.--I am deeply grieved at the tidings announced. A sincere
prayer is offered up for amendment and restoration.--B. March 2.


202.--_Monday, April 15, 1850._

A. B. C. D. is informed that what he desired is done, and that his
wishes are entirely granted by the parties concerned.


203.--_Saturday, April 20, and 22, 23, 24, 1850._

A BIT OF MY MIND.--A. M., March 25.


204.--_Wednesday, April 24, 1850._

A SUBSTANTIAL PROOF of SYMPATHY, No. 82, 287 RECEIVED.


205.--_Wednesday, April 24, 1850._

---- IS READY to ATTEND at ANY TIME (the sooner the better) on having
directions sent here, in town. April 23.


206.--_Wednesday, May 1, 1850._

NO. 3.--S. lmpi. F. npi. C. qgnl. F. pil. ogpk. S. ongq. of. C. hgo.
lnho. B. hkq. ogki. in F. hnio. C. nhgq. B. qkin. F. pil. C. qikl. in.
D. qkl. C. qmgh. Austen’s F. klmn. are. now qphi. to B. qnp. C. lpi.
pmig. hlpm. F. pil. S. nlgk. E. lipg. F. ihmn.--J. de W.


207.--_Thursday, May 9 and 10, 1850._

TO A. B.--I intend to OPPOSE, but others should join me. I shall be glad
to receive another letter without delay, and I will consider it
confidential.


208.--_Tuesday, May 28, 1850._

A. W.--The DOG “WOLF” is DEAD. The experiment has fully succeeded. The
“Bear” mourns. “Tidus vale amicus.”


209.--_Wednesday, May 29, 1850._

TO A * * * *.--If humanity has not entirely fled from your breast,
return, oh! return, ere it is too late, to the heart-broken distracted
wife you have forsaken--ere the expression of those soft eyes that won
you be lost in the bewildered stare of insanity--ere they may gaze even
on you and know you not; write, tell her, oh! tell her, where you are,
that she may follow you--her own, her all--and die. See her once more.


210.--_Thursday, May 30, 1850._

A. W.--The WOLF is NOT DEAD, but has been dangerously ill. Letters are
intercepted. I trust no one. Break not your pledge. Communicate
personally.--B. . . . . ts.


211.--_Saturday, June 1, 1850._

NO. 4.--S. lmpi. at Cqgnl. and F. pink F. mqho olhi C. hgo F. klgp npkl
nhog mqol. E. liko F. piho nhgm. F. igkl clqgn B. ngo F. ngli kmon omnl
E. nolp; F. hnlg, not S. pnqh. F. mg op C. ngml F. kiqg 3, hnpo, 2.
hqlk. qgli penny, oimp lhog ikpo.--J. de W.


212.--_Monday, July 1, 1850._

NO. 5.--Glmpi at Cqgnl and F pink. Sophm. of Chgs. Spngk Cmkqn. Chgik.
at qgnl, qknp inF. hnio. A Ckpgl Flopn mihi hipo Snmlo. Enqkh.
Songm.--J. de W.


213.--_Friday, July 12, 1850._

NON VENI, NON VIDE; with many thanks.


214.--_Monday, July 15, and 18, 22, 25, 1850._

THE ONE-WINGED DOVE must DIE unless the CRANE RETURNS to be a shield
against her enemies.


215.--_Friday, July 19, 1850._

TO NON VENI, NON VIDE.--With many thanks. Ho passato mólte infelici óre.


216.--_Thursday, July 25, and Monday, August 5, 1850._

HIS HONOR ne MANQUE que TOI SEUL. Welcome in poverty. Ecris. Viens. Je
meurs.--Jennie.


217.--_Thursday, August 1, 1850._

NO. 6.--Slmpi at Cqgnl and F pink. Fmqho olhi Chgo, Fpgnm Eomin 22nd
Fmnhq, oing Epqig, and Fnpkl by Enhkp, Foghm npmq ogpi. Chgik and Cuhgq
Fnpqm Cqknp in Fhnio. Cpoml Snigl Enpqh. Sonqh. Fkqpo hipk mqho olhi,
Enqkh. Cigi S. to Fmlgi Cqkin.--J. de W.


218.--_Wednesday, August 28, 1850._

S. F., CHELSEA. APPOINT the PLACE. Delay not; I trust to your word, but
cannot live in this state of indecision. All will be well could I but
see you. M. H. Address, 137, Jermyn-street.


219.--_Saturday, August 31, 1850._

S. lkqo. C. hgvk F. qik qolg F. hmip hnio S. kng- C. hgo S mig F ikpg
pgkm. oinl V. C. E. F. phgk S. koh. F. qmp F. lqip mioq noil. C. lgi.
Fngli F oinl mpkh B ogqn. F pil F mlgi C. qkin S oqig. T qgli A. F.
khmn. S pum. pkol C. qknp F oign. lqkh iplq nmkq ikho F. lgqp. hkpg
lhko. niqm C qgnl pmqi D. mul F lqim E. nkmp. F iomg S kng. C opq F hki
hnim pil ilmg. B mlqp F nokg hmqk nhkl mgiq F mioq hnq oqil olhi. F
npmh. nhi. J. de W.


220.--_Friday, September 6, 1850._

1842.--AT HOME, BUT WHAT CAN YOU MEAN?


221.--_Tuesday, September 10, 1850._

ANONYMOUS.--RECEIVED. You are right in your conjecture.


222.--_Tuesday, October 1, 1850._

S. lkqo F. lgqo lqoi. C. hgo. F. olhi. E. omin F. nqmo. oghm to mhn hipo
at E. mlhg. S. pkol. F. pil hmng oghm npmq S. ompk. C omgk. nhqk F. mlgi
to qmlp. B. pikl S. ompi. F. hnpq oinl F. mlqn hlin mpkh C. mlik F. mkiq
npgk. mnli is mlgi ikpg ipl ngli oqhn in hnio lpqk qolg C. lmoh is F.
oqhk omni oinl C. okiq knho is mlgi C. lgi. S. F. qmlh omni a onmh hnoi
S. lmqg F. hkpg oign on hmig ikho nmkq lgiq--a F. qglp lgqp Caxton F.
qmlh lpqi.--J. de W.


223.--_Tuesday, October 8 and 9, 1850._

TO MATILDA.--Everything has been done, but in vain. When I wrote to
secure that nothing should be neglected, it was already too late. I
shall, if possible, reach N.--A. B.


224.--_Saturday, October 12, 1850._

3 1 3 1 389 p 7 9 l t 7 4 8 9 7 6 3 d 4 832 l 3 d l 7 y 7 4 7 1 h 389 17
58 t p 77 1 317 b 32 11 1 f 7 87 hh 31 v 36 839 17 312 h 71 h 38 p 81 y
131 53 h 318 f 875 yu 7.


225.--_Tuesday, October 22, 1850._

1842.--UNITY.--Your QUESTION of the 6th September would have received an
immediate answer had it been immediately comprehended.


226.--_Friday, October 25, 1850._

L. G. 10 (130) 10 (110) 8 (60)


227.--_Monday, October 28, 1850._

FROM S. R.--YOUR WIFE and FAMILY IMPLORE you to give them some ADDRESS.
Although you (from the great anxiety I have been in) have seen little
outward show, you cannot know the deep anxiety of my almost broken
heart. Oh! that we could have communicated with you! The kindness of
public and private friends, could they have drawn you back, would have
reinstated you. I entreat of you to empower me to communicate with you.
Did you see my advertisement in the _Times_ of the 12th inst.?


228.--_Wednesday, October 30, 1850._

T. R. 455 3 d 41 t 349 h 1 l 9 36 d t 7 p 7 9 t 7 6 3 w y 7 8 k t 7 5 8
t p 7 7 1 3 9 7 u 8 9 h 1 9 2 7 5 3 7 f 1 6 4 6 9 t 4 h 1 v 3 t 8 4 3 d
8 t 7 u w 3 11 p 8 1 q f 7 8 8 3 9 t 7 8 1 4 7 6 9 1 8 1 8 3 9.--3 1.


229.--_Friday, November 1, 1850._

SUHWWB ZHOO--Irw blw--Brx, pdb vdihob--Ydxjkwrq Whuwdfh, Edovdoo Khdwk.


230.--_Monday, November 11, 1850._

MORE.--W. C.


231.--_Tuesday, November 12, 1850._

E. R. C.--CONSENTS.


232.--_Thursday, November 14, 1850._

ANONYMOUS.--“CONFIDENTIAL.”--The “Good Fellow” would really be obliged
if the “Friend” would help him out of the scrape by a little further
advice as to the “party.” Direct the letter, with the Christian name in
full, to No. 8.


233.--_Tuesday, November 17, and 20, 21, 1850._

I am sorry that you did not WAIT for our FRIEND, who would have
explained much more than my letter. Pray reflect on the difficulty in
which you place me. I am most anxious to help you, and you render it
impossible for me to do so. Just ask yourself what single act I can do
without your help? None. No one but yourself can sign or explain
anything. If you persevere the consequence will be that the affair will
pass into other hands, and half the money will be spent in law. You are
not doing justice either to yourself or to me. You say you have acted
deliberately; if you have you must have been ignorant of your true
position and the consequences of your acts. Pray reflect. With your aid
anything can be done; but without it nothing.--Douglas, viâ Hull.--_Nov.
18, 1850._


234.--_Saturday, November 23, 1850._

SOMERSET.--S. B. The MATE of the DOVE must TAKE WING from England for
ever, unless a material change takes place.--J. B.


235.--_Tuesday, November 26, 1850._

KENT.--J. B.--The MATE of the DOVE bids a final FAREWELL Adieu to the
British Isles, although such a resolution cannot be accomplished without
poignant grief.--W.


236.--_Saturday, November 30, 1850._

NO. 9.--Slmpi at Cqgnl. Chgo Smhn at Cqgnl 25th Nov. 1850. Fmqln Eomin.
April. Elpmo May. Emlhg July (to Fmlih hipo). E pqig Sepr. nhkp Octr.
Fatty Fhknom lpgh mlgk in Dagi Fmohp mpqn. mqho. kiqn to Emlhg 15th
Fogpm mioq. gpl in ihmo 1st ogpm mioq. Fkqpo 2 mqho olhi Emig. Chgo is
(Fnhmp mpoh hipo.) Lass. y Fihkq npinq omnl hipo.--J. de W.


237.--_Wednesday, December 4, 1850._

W. M.--YES.--It shall be brought forward this evening. Read the first
paragraph (with note), page 84, and law, No. 3, page 86, of the Book of
Constitutions (1847).


238.--_Monday, December 9, 1850._

B. J. C.--How more than cruel not to write. Take mercy on such patient
silence.


239.--_Wednesday, January 1, 1851._

S. lmpi at C. qgnl B. qkig had a F. mpko iqhl on the 30th Novr. F. hlk.
B. pnmh C. hgo and F. kmn are. F. kgmp hmig. C. omgk and B. hkq F. olq
to F mpkh hkon C. qknp at Llanhenwye C. qkin F mlgi. C. lgi. S. oqlk.
27th--to F. mpkh in E. hino C. hgo F. kgmp hmig and iomn at mpkl ihpk
mipk 25th a F. khg kiqn lpqi for hipo by F. ikpg. C. oqn F. hlug mqol.
E. phqk. 25th Jany. 8. F. hkpg in church C. hgo. F. kpmi us so of
hipi--F. qik are moqn so hmig kql. T lqo T nghm mik mo lqin 7 pgmq nkmq
7 hiqo.--J. de W.


240.--_Saturday, January 4, 1851._

P. P. P. is implored, for mercy’s sake, to WRITE AGAIN. If not, your
wretched father will be a maniac, and your poor unhappy mother will die
broken-hearted.


241.--_Monday, January 27, 1851._

TO C.--It’s all right; the danger you apprehended is stopped; nothing is
known; every difficulty shall be removed; you are freely forgiven; come
without a moment’s delay.--J.


242.--_Saturday, February 1, 1851._

NUMBER 11.--S. lmpi at. C. qgnl. F. hipk mqho. E. ogln ngpi. S. niql. F.
lgqo. from C. mqni. E. mlhg. a. F. mioq F. mgih S. mhl. F. hmin so. F.
oiqm. you and S. lmpi. and F. kmpl at E. lhpo. and F. mkql. the. C. mqni
and F. ikql. you. F. nkiq. hkoq at. E. lhpo. C. hgo. has F mik. mohp F.
phqn. to the F. oihg Exhibition all. F. oiph up to F. mogl. C. qkin F.
mlgi. Spgio. 27th G. mqni. S. pgqm. pkoh. a F. khg. S. lmon the C. oqn.
S. oqln to E. lmgq. F. pino. of your. F. oqki are at E. qlhp. C. nqh. B.
onhi is here.--J. de W.


243.--_Monday, February 3, 1851._

TO C . . . . . S.--Once again you are entreated to leave off this cruel
silence. Could you but see the party who causes this to be inserted,
and one who is still believed to possess truth and honour, you would
relieve an aching heart and a miserable existence by replying to this at
once. I still wear the ring. S. P. H. M.


244.--_Thursday, February 6, 1851._

FAIR PLAY.--The PROBLEM will be Solved by application to the Executive.


245.--_Saturday, February 15, 1851._

TO D.--THANKS for your COMMUNICATION. As the clothes are ready, I am
ready to wear them. Always the same; the bar of iron. Pray
communicate.--E. W.


246.--_Friday, February 21, 1851._

P * * * L.--Expectans expectavi.--Are you ill, angry, or unable?


247.--_Saturday, February 22, 1851._

PROVIDENCE is my beacon; and, rest assured, I will do all I can do. I
will COMMUNICATE the result of To-morrow in the _Sunday Times_.--F. S.
P.

  _Feb. 21._


248.--_Friday, February 28, 1851._

NO. 17 WOULD RATHER NOT. Send again.


249.--_Saturday, March 1, 1851._

NO. 12.--S. lmpi at C qgnl qkin F. mlgi ihmn 27th C lgi S qmng 20 C qpnh
F. nmkq iglp oiqn hnqn R N and R E 5 C qpnh F mngk, nmkq mhgn oiqn hnq C
hgo qkin and lgi F onqk mqho onqk mqho olhi C mqni F olhi E minl F pgnq
Jany. 6th F mkip ikpg B nho.--J. de W.


250.--_Wednesday, March 5, 1851._

SIR CHARLES, pray Write.--Lightning.


251.--_Monday, March 17, 1851._

ADELPHI.--Go to the Office agreed upon very soon.

  _March 11._


252.--_Thursday, March 20, 1851._

TO T. E.--Is unison only a sound the sense of the ear to awaken?--L. E.
L., P. O., Glocester.


253.--_Wednesday, March 26, 1851._

MARCH 23.--Do COME AGAIN, as then I knew not what I said.


254.--_Monday, March 31, 1851._

TO E. S. Lynn.--The PORTMANTEAU is RECOVERED. The owner forgives. Go,
and sin no more.


255.--_Tuesday, April 1, 1851._

FIKPG, C qgnl. F qlgo, nghm. qmlh, to, mogl, to, iomn, hkom O, hgo, F,
lmho, C, mnpk, F, hnpq, nokl, ogpk pinl. hmig C, qkin F, hnpq, ngmo C,
qgnl. F. qlgo. hnoi, C lhmn S, lmgh F, hmng oiph, to, hnio, nmkq mnpk,
pil, nphl, onmh, hmkp nmkq--nhop. C. Cnho. F. npqm.--J. de W.


256.--_Thursday, April 3, 1851._

TO T. E.--The INTELLIGENCE you received is TRUE. Can I venture, without
any risk of being annoyed by ----, who gave me proof that I was known
personally? Your message was received. Should any change take place in
our plans I will write to the address you gave me, and in token send you
a paper. Address where I told you.--L. E. L.


257.--_Tuesday, April 15, 1851._

BREVE, BREVIARIUM, BREVITER, ABBREVIATUM sufficit intelligenti: 1838,
May or June, 1839, January 15-31 D; 17-24 N: February 1-14 D; 1-4 N.
1843? 1846, April. 1847, January 23, June 1848, January 19, May 15. 1849
(3 Janvier, 1849) May: June 11, 12, 15: November 1. 15, 17, 18: December
5, 7, 1850. January 11th, May 8, 16, 22, 30: June 19, 20, 21: October
17, November 1st. At my correspondent’s request, January 15th, 1851.
Address, Dr. William Edward Hunter, M.D., Littleport-street, Lynn,
Norfolk.


258.--_Friday, April 18, 1851._

A DREAM.--If the person at Southampton, who had a “Curious Dream” will
COMMUNICATE such further INFORMATION as may lead to the result hinted
at, either to the party formerly addressed, or to B. J., Jerusalem
Coffee-house, Cornhill, a liberal REWARD may be arranged, and secrecy
preserved.


259.--_Tuesday, April 22, 1851._

PALLACE’S P. and W.


260.--_Wednesday, April 23, 1851._

PALLACE’S P. and M.


261.--_Thursday, May 1, 1851._

NO. 14.--S lmpi at. C. qoul. & F. pink. P. M. C. lnho. omgk. qlin, & B
hkq. F. nqpg. in. mo.gh.ltu S. oqlg F. nhlm, knom, for, C. hgo. F. lqip
of the lqmg npi, ikqg. Exhibition F. qik. qmlh ploi to hnip. omnl a
mioq. C klmh. & B. qigk. F. qmlh too. C. qkin & lgi. F. hipn. at C. lhmn
B kml. F. knoq is a iplq. opkn. 5 mioq. lqkn. C. opq & lmoh. F. kmn,
ilmg. F. kqpo hipk. mqho. olhi. E. lhpo.--J. de W.


262.--_Monday, May 12, 1851._

MOSS ROSE.--The Lady who clandestinely left her home on the 1st of May
is most earnestly implored to RETURN immediately, or to write to
“Highlander,” whom she so cruelly deceived on the evening of Wednesday.
Feelings of the warmest affection, saddened, alas! by intense grief,
incite this annonce (_sic_).


263.--_Thursday, May 15, 1851._

MOSS ROSE.--You know not what may be the consequence of this most cruel
conduct. In mercy, lose not a moment in forwarding your ADDRESS to
“Highlander,” who is suffering the most intense grief. Your really
affectionate heart will surely not permit you to defer till Tuesday.


264.--_Wednesday, May 28, 1851._

DOOR MAT TO-NIGHT.


265.--_Saturday, May 31, 1851._

NO. 15.--S lmpi at. C. qgnl. F. ohig a hnpg plg hnoi in mogl & hnio. C
hgo F inqg in mogl. C. omgk & the qoig qmlh to C. qgnl in F nhop. B.
qkng F. qmlh S. onqh. C. klmh & B qigk. go to. F. mogl S. lmqp. F. kqpo.
2 mqho olhi hipo olhi C. ngqo. F. mnhq 29th C okiq at. F. npkl. nqgp
ogpn kqpo ogk of ikng opl ohg we kiqg ikpo mioq.--J. de W.


266.--_Tuesday, June 17-19-21, 1851._

TO B. J. C., GREENWICH.--Every means has been attempted, every chance
traced; the boldest steps taken, the greatest hopes raised. These last
have appeared at intervals, but of course you could not understand.
Alas, I regret to tell you, all, all is without success. £500 will now
be given this week for an explanation by letter, and the same next week
for a final explanation in Words. Why ask for a letter and then not
accept it?--E. S.--November last.


267.--_Tuesday, July 1, 1851._

YES, ELLEN.


268.--_Tuesday, July 15-16, 1851._

WILLIAM, thou wilt go to sea--thou shalt go; but O RETURN, and first
receive the blessings of a heart-broken father, of a heart-broken
Mother! O my son William, my son, my son William! Would God I had died
for thee, O William, my son, my son!


269.--_Saturday, July 26, 1851._

INCOGNITA.--Pray write again. Where can I address a letter? You work in
the dark.


270.--_Friday, August 1, 1851._

S LMPI F. npi C qgnl F. pil F pink, C mgil F pil Bqkng F hkom F hqon F
onql qolg F. npi C qgnl, C hgo F npkl F qmk olhi npmh pkqi in mogl Fatty
F. vim pil lokg a oinl ogmk innqg npi, E mpnl C omgk F ikho qolg npqm
mqho olhi D iql F pgnq May 9th F oign oinl li of hipo.--J. de W.


271.--_Monday, August 11, 1851._

TO C. D.--CONSENT, M. M.


272.--_Monday, August 11, 1851._

THANKS for the LETTER.--Sudden despair of success made me defer but by
no means abandon it. Believe nothing against, but write often to, Z.


273.--_Monday, September 1, 1851._

S. lmpi F. npi. Cqgnl. Tatty. F. lokg ogmk. C. klmh. Fqolg. lgn
ihno!--C. nbgq. qkin. B. qkng. C. omgk. qlin ohkq. ât F. npki--with 7.
F. qolg C. mgil. C. lgi. C. lnho--and C. qknp. in F. hnio. B. pnmh. a
cornet in 1st F. mpql ohpk. Fiffy F. oing to be F. mlgi to B. plmo. de
W--C kgpm. not F. qmkg. C. hgo. at. C. qgnl. F. inqg.--J. de W.


274.--_Monday, September 1, 1851._

A. T., ce Samedi, 30.--J’ai ta lettre de Vendredi. Merci. Ecris le plus
souvent possible; pendant ton absence c’est mon seul bonheur. Tes
souffrances je les sens, et tes chagrins et tes malheurs, je les connais
et je les partage. Je suis à Londres pour quelques jours. Si je pouvais
te voir, tu me dira si c’est possible. J’ai toute confiance en toi:
j’attends et j’espère.


275.--_Thursday, September 4, 1851._

A. T., ce Mercredie.--J’ai REÇU ta LETTRE. Ne t’inquiéte de rien.
Soigne--toi; tout ira bien. J’aurai de la patience. Je me fie à toi. Je
te previendrai avant mon départ.


276.--_Monday, September 8, 1851._

A. T., ce Dimanche Soir.--Il me sera IMPOSSIBLE d’y VENIR; ne t’inquiéte
pas; dans peu de jours j’espère; mais je te derai quand.


277.--_Tuesday, September 9, 1851._

T. D.--HAS IT.


278.--_Wednesday, September 10, 1851._

A. Je te REMERCIE. J’aurai de la patience.


279.--_Thursday, September 11, 1851._

TO ITALIA.--G. F. will be extremely GLAD. But why not afford him some
means of knowing.


280.--_Friday, September 12, and October 1, 1851._

B. E.--GIRL ALL IS WELL.


281.--_Tuesday, September 23, 1851._

I MUST SEE YOU immediately.--Au revoir.


282.--_Tuesday, September 23, 1851._

A. J. G.--Est ce que je me trompe, ou non?--Le Rhone, Napoli,
Roma.--W---- de C.


283.--_Friday, September 26, 1851._

CHS., write to your best friend, now in England, and explain all
accounts. Send his letters also. You may yet have the pleasure of saying
good-bye to your misfortunes.


284.--_Wednesday, October 1, 1851_

NO. 16th.--S. lkqo. C. hgo & Tatty. F. kmn at npkl F. qgli lngk S mhn F.
olhi E qkpn. S. niql S mnhq F. qgli. Austin S pgon C. kioq 6th F. iqhl
born 13th F. kipo a F. khg. hmip to E. mlhg by D oi. S. pkqg C omgk B.
hkq. qkng F. oiph. to hnio. S. cmpi C. mkop F. oiph to Mr. C. nhmg & F.
mpkh. nmkq E. lhpq.--J. de W.


285.--_Thursday, October 2, 1851._

TO NELLY.--“The MINSTREL BOY,” who left Gr . . . s T. n unknown to his
friends about three weeks since. Was dressed in a rusty black surtout
coat, common cloth waistcoat, trowsers marked with ink, and an old Caen
hat. No ear for music. Pray return to your disconsolate friends. All
will be forgiven, and Charlie will give up the front room.


286.--_Wednesday, October 22, 1851._

MRS. . . . . . N.--Be entreated. If you ever loved the father of your
child, if you love your child, do not persevere in your absence, unless
you would sacrifice A. F. or R. F. He is in a distressing state. For
Annie’s sake, if not for his, a mutual friend prays you to WRITE at once
to Mr. Hamilton, and say when and where you will meet A. F. The
consequences of your silence will be serious.


287.--_Thursday, October 23, 1851._

Châtelaine wrote many days ago, but there was some mistake. Three
received in all. Many thanks. Grandpapa is unwell, but sends his love to
Châtelaine. Write soon.


288.--_Wednesday, October 29, 1851._

MRS. . . . . . N.--Your note has been received. It is evasive, cold, and
cruel. It is incredible that you should be watched and coerced; if so,
come at once to the man who is now fully prepared to be satisfactorily
yours only, and for life. What accursed spirit holds you in thraldom,
and can influence you to abandon your child and husband? In wretchedness
he appeals to you against this influence. Let the feelings of your own
good heart prevail. RETURN, if but for a few days, to your home, and
confer with your husband. Nothing shall be done to mar your comfort or
ease, but do not, for the will of others, sacrifice the peace of mind
and health of the man you have professed to love above all others. Your
husband, A. F.


289.--_Saturday, November 1, 1851._

NO. 20th.--S. lmpi F npi. npkl. C. hgo. F . opnl M. C. qlin F. ikpg
npkl, loni ikpg F. lpgh, hqon, olq. nmkq hngo. & F. mpng, ihlm, iomn 6.
mioq. M. & C hgo. F. nghm, mik, ihlm C. pkl F. igkl. F. C. igk. F. kmoq
ihim. C. lnho, F. ikql. hipk o. q. gp. hmqk F. ikpg. lqin, lqip. nqmo.
npih F. nmkq C. iko F. inqg, npi, npkl. F. nikg oing. ihlm, lkiq iolk &
F. oghm, ihlm, oiph hkom. lg qp. F. oqip, S. link. M. F. oiph ihlm. C.
qkin, S. qkgl. F. hnio. qlgo. hlk. F. npi C. lhmn, lgi & qkin, F. oing
F. lqkh hmig B. qipm & F. hlkp. C. klmh & F. qolg, hnpq, hmig C. qknp.
F. iph, npmh, npkl B. qkng F olq. ikh. B. qkng F. hmig C. nhgq. & F.
hmig. qmlh. F. npqm. C. okiq & nphi F. oing. F. ihlm. E. qlhp. C. lgmh
F. npi C. nhmg. E. lhpq.--J. de W.


290.--_Tuesday, November 4, 1851._

C. H. has RECEIVED his dear friend’s 82,750; kind remembrances, with
thanks, in which Caroline and Louisa join--both unhappily married,
residing with their father, and exerting themselves for his comfort and
support. There are three sons, whom he never sees, and who, in his old
age, afford him neither solace nor assistance. He will be rejoiced to
receive the promised long letter.


291.--_Monday, November 10, 1851._

MRS. F . . . . . . . N.--The step you have taken has already had its
effect. The letter received (indirectly) on Friday by A. F. was
satisfactory, if you have acted in conformity with his entreaty. On
Monday see our dear Annie, and I will meet you either at the Hudson’s in
the morning, or at the Gate’s in the after noon, at their usual time: or
any day but Tuesday.


292.--_Tuesday, November 11, 1851._

MRS. F . . . . . . . . N.--A. F. WAITED till 12. Can you not to your
child spare one day from those who have so long engrossed your
obedience, thoughts, actions, and feelings? Pause! Do not leave as you
threatened. This day (Tuesday) see A. F. in the morning at friend
Hudson’s, or at half past 3 where we parted weeks ago, on Wednesday, as
arranged. +.


293.--_Wednesday, November 19, 1851._

MRS. F . . . . . . . N.--Is this not cruel? Two hours’ cold anxious
waiting and watching. You evade meeting. You will not write. Come to R.
F. at the same place, at 5 to-day (Wednesday): or on Thursday, at the
same time and place, as on Tuesday. R. F. will wait till you come. Pray
write to Hamilton. Do not go away!


294.--_Thursday, November 27, 1851._

M. V. W.--They are gone. COME BACK.--B. W·


295.--_Friday, December 5, 1851._

THE VIOLETS have been RECEIVED at St. Petersbourg, with many thanks.


296.--_Thursday, January 1, 1852._

S. lmpi F, npi npkl M. npi. C. lhmn. omgk. F, pil. B. hkq F, inqg nmkq
hmio, iomn. ikph, ihpk pkli C. hgo. F. npi. E. lipg F. mpng ihlm kpni
ikph 6 mioq. C okiq F. pil C npki F, npi. npkl. hoq iknq oiph ihlm C.
lmi F nmkq oplg. C. lnho. F. qmlh npqm nmkq oplg F. ogq oqgp oing lpqi
olhi npqm C. nhgq. F, npi. npkl. kgip. hmig C. klmh F. hlki mlp. ploh
nmkq.oplg npqm, M. F, qmlh npkl. S. pkqg F. mhlg qik ikpg hkpg nmkq
mo-qn. hnpq hmig C. qkin F. oing a, mpko. khq lqkh ikpg 15th pghq pmkn
hmig. C. kgpm S. F. nmkq phqm. lopi olhi C. ngil iko. F, kmoi S lmgh. F,
nmkq ikpg B. mh F. mqho olhi B. nlo, E. minl. F, pgnq lqom 6th S. lmpi.
F, kqpo hipk mqho, pgiq nhog hiql.--J. de W.


297.--_Thursday, January 8, 1852._

CHATELAINE.--Why have you not written again? If you direct as your last,
the LETTER will be forwarded. Grandpapa has been very ill in town, and
consequently unable to comply with your request.


298.--_Thursday, January 22, 1852._

HUKKY BOY CHARLIE CALL ME FOOL--me cane. Lizzy, pray come home. Your
husband and sisters are reconciled. All is arranged. One of your sisters
is waiting your return at Notting-Hill.


299.--_Wednesday, January 28, 1852._

LIZZY.--Your LETTER is RECEIVED. I am at Notting-Hill, waiting to see
you. Pray, for the sake of all that’s dear to you, come to me, or I
will come to you. Write at once, as I cannot return home till I have
seen you. All are friends. All is secret as yet. Much has been effected
for your comfort.


300.--_Monday, February 2, 1852._

S. lmpi F. npi npkl. B qkng. F. oimg a khq. 19th nhgm, oing. lqkh. hmig
Fiffy mlgi, W. de W. 27th nhgm, mpkh. nmkq, C. qpoh F. khg mqho, lopn.
oiph. omnl hipo. knq, qgh. M. g. re. & Bt-s-n S onpg C. qhnp F. oimg.
niqm. npnih. npkl. C. qkin F. khq hlk, C hgo, F, qgli, K, F, mhik mik
npqm, C. klmh, nhgq, Inho omgk, mgil B, hkq, S lmpi, C. klmh F. khq,
hlk, C. qknp. F. qgli, K & B. . . l. . . r it is iklm. hiki qmkl. ogq.
oqgp. to E lhmn, F, qogp. Sinm--J. de W.


301.--_Tuesday, February 10, 1852._

TIG tjvhw it tig jfhiiwola og tig psgvw.--F. D. N.


302.--_Thursday, February 19, 1852._

ZUTRAVEN.--WARUM KOMMT ST. P. NICHT?


303.--_Friday, February 20, 1852._

TO EQUATOR.--Fortuna audaces juvat--vincit omnia veritas.--E. W.


304.--_Friday, February 20, 1852._

M. D. M. C.--My position towards you is truly painful. It is now in your
power to relieve my suffering? Will you when we meet again (soon I hope)
kindly let me know? Jemius.--Wednesday.


305.--_Monday, February 23, 1852._

AUT CÆSAR aut NULLUS. Indigo blue is willing.


306.--_Tuesday, February 24, 1852._

MONITOR.--J. N.


307.--_Monday, March 1, 1852._

S. lmpi F. npi C. qgnl. F. npi, pink C. hgo, F. oing to E. nhkp S. mng
to F. ilgn hlip, mo, olmh, mioq C. lnho, F. npi C. qgnl S o. g nq B klmh
F pil qolg npi. C. qgnl, S mng F. qgli K. l. . .t F. qmkl B, qnp. F
qgli, B. l . . . r C. lpi, F. oiph. S ognq C omqk y pil, B. hkq. F. inqg
in F, hnio C iko S kgip, F, olhi E, nqlk F. nho, hnlo C, nolk, knhp. F.
oing to mlgi mkhg qhnl F. lpqi iomg S. lmpi. J. de W.


308.--_Tuesday, March 2, 1852._

QUIS EST CÆSAR?--Do, pray, enlighten me. The agonizing week’s delay has
not been occasioned by J . . . . S.


309.--_Wednesday, March 3, 1852._

TO F. D. N., Glasgow, February 16th, 1852.--“The _Times_ is the
Jefferies of the Press.” Beta, box 318, Post-office, Bristol.


310.--_Monday, March 8, 1852._

CIRCUMSPICE.--Box-moor, Herts.--E. W.


311.--_Tuesday, March 9, 1852._

R----. Thank you for the INFORMATION given a few months ago, respecting
the letters sent to P . . . . . r. Write by to-morrow’s post, please.
Fear not.--London-wall. Tom. Try to understand this mystery, 10.


312.--_Tuesday, March 9, 1852._

TO EQUATOR.--Circumspice.--Your great ship, the Christopher Columbus,
when laden with indigo, opium, or the most costly merchandise of the
East, never contained so much wealth as stands on that said hill.--E. W.


313.--_Wednesday, March 10, 1852._

INDIGO BLUE.--Where and how shall I send my address? I, too, have grown
cautious at last. Are you as entirely ignorant as you seem? Be candid
and careful as to this.


314.--_Thursday, March 11, 1852._

NOT to EQUATOR.--You might have saved yourself the trouble, and been the
richer by 5_s._ Tom is sure to go to the wall without your telling him.
The Ten is particularly happy, the chances being 10 to 1 that he will
cross Earth’s central line, and then, being as invulnerable as Achilles,
he will have nothing to fear. Tom will understand this mystery without
trying.--E. W.


315.--_Friday, March 12, 1852._

AU SIMULACRE.--You have only precipitated your friends into the abyss of
destruction. Ou pardonne à ceux que l’on méprise.--E. W.


316.--_Friday, March 12, 1852._

INDIGO BLUE.--Was I to say that my mind had not formed an idea of you,
candour would indeed be wronged; but diffidence arises when I put this
question; what claim have I to such kindness? Please send your address
by letter to Alexis, Post-office, Chester; and, in order that the
exchange may be mutual, my card will await you at the Post-office,
Clifton, near Bristol.


317.--_Monday, March 15, 1852._

E. W.--What have I done to call forth such cruel remarks? Let me entreat
you to favour me with some EXPLANATION. Enemies shall not long triumph
over us if you will only join me in this declaration. Do not despair, or
on any account give place to the dishonour of foes. In so far as I am
concerned the matter has been confined to myself.--A. B. C.


318.--_Monday, March 15, 1852._

TO MY BELOVED EQUATOR.--When I visited the Great Exhibition I fancied
Hampden, though refreshed with the living water from the Crystal
Fountain, frowned at me; I hope our great countryman is now convinced we
have not degenerated, and that his impersonation has resumed its
accustomed serenity. Ce n’est que le premier pas qui coute, c’est fait;
et c’en est fait d’eux. Vous voyez, la Providence n’est pas toujours
avec les forts bataillons.--E. W.


319.--_Tuesday, March 16, 1852._

HONEST, HONEST ALEXIS! What a strange coincidence! Remove the last
syllable, and there was, once, a great man, one of the self-constituted,
sacred race, known by that cognomen, whom I,--for which, of course, I
shall never be forgiven,--transformed--as I intend to serve many
more--into a city spectre. Honest, honest Alexis! may that never be your
fate. Candour would then indeed be wronged.--E. W.


320.--_Thursday, March 18, 1852._

E. W. by TELEGRAPH.--What are you alluding to? SEND YOUR ADDRESS. Direct
immediately. I was much disappointed at not receiving it on Saturday,
and have been in the greatest agony ever since. You are freely forgiven;
extend your mercy to Alexis.


321.--_Friday, March 19, 1852._

I AM COME. I will wait but this day and to-morrow. Remember, “Now or
never.”


322.--_Friday, March 19, 1852._

TO CHARYBDIS.--AGRICOLAE FILIUS WAITS.--Aut Terrae filius aut Fortunae
filius.


323.--_Friday, March 19, 1852._

WHAT AM I ALLUDING TO? The Customs. You will only deceive the
superficial fools of the nation--Alexis. A. B. C. & Telegraph being
Siamese twins, the answer given to Alexis will do for the lot.--E. W.


324.--_Saturday, March 20, 1852._

DOOR-MAT and BEANS TO-NIGHT.


325.--_Tuesday, March 23, 1852._

E. W.--Author of anonymous correspondence, look at home. Conscience does
not accuse me of even attempting to deceive. You have, however, been
playing the game of deception for several years, until, judging from
your exasperated feelings, you are at last tired that your bait has not
taken. Have you a conscience? This is doubted by some, whilst others
think that you have, but that it dwells far beneath its usual seat.
Alexis bids you farewell.


326.--_Friday, March 26, 1852._

IT IS THE MAN--Yes, it is the man.


327.--_Wednesday, March 31, 1852._

OUI, je suis le serpent nourri dans votre sein; mais, pour le bien et
peut être pour le bonheur de mon pays, et, quoique vous soyez de la race
sacrée, il faut bien vous en souvenir, que mon sang ne soit pas l’eau de
fossé.--E. W.


328.--_Thursday, April 1, 1852._

RESTITUTION.--The COMPOSITION will be ACCEPTED, and this will be
considered final.


329.--_Friday, April 2, 1852._

S. lmpi C. qgnl. C. lnho, in (qo) F, qmkg C. okiq. E qlhp. C. nghq C.
nhok. & klmh F, oqhi C. mgil F qik C. qgnl, C hgo C qgnl S. olqh. E
nhkp. C nkh, B. qlpm F, kqno. F. oilg F, oqhi nohg 50th F, mlgi pgmq F,
klgh ophg F, op B. . . . ts. n., F, kmon C. mlon F, iokg 14th F, mnhq C.
hngm K--t. F, hmig, F, lkhi pkmi, oqgp. S mnhk mnl F, mhn R----e F, komq
F, mik. 71½ N, 101 W. F. klih F, plmk gkmg S mihl D, olg.--J. de W.


330.--_Wednesday, April 7, 1852._

HARRY.--I said you were insane, when you wrote a portion of a letter
which H. concluded. Your presence or address is required on urgent
business. Write to the “Butterfly Seal,” or call upon me at F----
Street.--Harry the 2nd.


331.--_Saturday, April 24, 1852._

DOUBTFUL PRINCIPLES.--I entreat you to WRITE me the REAL TRUTH, or
disgrace must fall on all here. I can bear no more.


332.--_Saturday, April 24, 1852._

BURY MY BONES.--BONES is earnestly requested to RETURN to his friends,
and he shall immediately receive the remnant.


333.--_Tuesday, April 27, 1852._

DOUBTFUL Principles.--I by no means acknowledge this title. It is too
bad of you. You are evidently laying to my charge things which I know
not, and are crucifying me for the machinations of others. Where may I
ADDRESS a Letter?


334.--_Thursday, April 29, 1852._

KITSY.--They wound deeply, but cannot destroy. You shall know all ere
long.--April 28, 1852.


335.--_Saturday, May 1, 1852._

SOCIAL BRICKS, remember May 5th, at 6 p.m.


336.--_Saturday, May 1, 1852._

TUESDAY.--Quite correct. Quietly wrapt up in mystery and silk. I have
seen it before mixed with others of different colour. One of the two
letters you address answers the question of initials. Homage to the
truth, to discretion.


337.--_Saturday, May 1, 1852._

S. lmpi at C. qgnl F. ikpg oinm pgmq 20th omp. hmip lqoh, hkom, hpgl
kmhg, qik, lign. hoq hipo C. omgk B. hkq qkog &. F. ikpq qolg. in ikpg,
mino, hmng okip, ikpg. khg to M. & P. pnog at hqon. hlkg nqlh. M. & P.
C. nkh B. qlpm F. mp. C qonp. in F. mghk mgk at lgpq qik C qgnl & F
hlnm, hqi C. mnq. F. oqgp kmon. omp 22d F. khmn B. . ts . . lgmh, oing
npi qik C. hgo F. lgmh. oing to E nhkp F, ihpk hkoq C. iko S mki E mnqi
B qglp F mik to E. nigm 1st F. mpqn B nlo. Fnipk C. ngil F. ongq
lmgh.--J. de W.


338.--_Monday, May 3, 1852._

I KNOW the points of attack, but you need not fear. The parties who
advance them do not know all. You shall. A true and (I doubt not)
satisfactory account will be given you of everything.


339.--_Thursday, May 13, 1852._

EIGHTH MAY.--You are not despised--quite the contrary.


340.--_Friday, May 14, 1852._

EIGHTH MAY.--I feel delighted, and shall get mad with joy. Pray do
ANSWER.


341.--_Saturday, May 15, 1852._

EIGHTH MAY.--Heed not yesterday’s device.


342.--_Monday, May 17, 1852._

AT SUCH an HOUR--at SUCH a PLACE. I cannot appoint until after the 20th.


343.--_Monday, May 17, 1852._

EIGHTH MAY.--The advertisement under this head on the 15th is not
inserted by the same party as that of the 14th.


344.--_Monday, May 17, 1852._

EIGHTH MAY.--Remember my request of the 14th May. Say no more. Don’t
heed other persons’ advices or devices.


345.--_Wednesday, May 19, 1852._

C. J.--Look for the third in my name. It is difficult for me to
communicate through the medium of a newspaper. “Sincere Regard,”
exquisite taste, but apparently no faith. I am not ungrateful. I only
wish for your ADDRESS by to-morrow’s post.--J. 1851 to 1852.


346.--_Thursday, May 20-31, 1852._

AT SUCH an HOUR, at such a place, on Friday, the 21st, at 7 o’clock in
the morning.


347.--_Thursday, May 20, 1852._

EIGHTH of MAY.--Will you write to identify the party? very anxious.


348.--_Tuesday, June 1, 1852._

S. lmpi at. F, npkl, C, lnho & inqo, F, nhmp., mqln, omnl F, hnio, C.
hgo F, mik, the S, oqlg in, E. mgqk. F. qmkg iqhk by hnio, iom, B hkq F.
npkl. C omgk. B hkq & F, qolg at, E, loqk B ogki F, oing nik hkom, C
lnho. M & C qlin F. mik to E ng.qi P. to C. nhgq. C klmh at F npkl, all
the hkpg. in lgiq hqon hkmn, oing lpqi to kpng hipo. C. qkin & the F.
qolg, S, lmpi B. qkng, S. lmpi F. oimg the C. omkq. F, olhi qgli C.
ngil.--J. de W.


349.--_Wednesday, June 2, 1852._

QUAL GIOJA per me é stato il rivederte. Ahiem? quasi ti credera perduta
è per sempre.


350.--_Monday, June 7, 1852._

M. J.

94039.--J. K.


351.--_Monday, June 7, 1852._

MARY HAMILTON. Wednesday, June 9, or Thursday, the 10th.


352.--_Tuesday, June 8, 1852._

J.--Let the result be what it may, you, and others too, have what is
asked of an individual under the initials W. S. If by this time you have
only learned to extend kindness to another, instead of cruelty to me, I
shall rest content, as some good will then have been derived.


353.--_Monday, June 14, 1852._

QUERIDA, Querida, je t’en prie de REPONDRE ne seras tu constant que
contre moi.


354.--_Wednesday, June 16, 1852._

AMOR! Amor!--C’est bien en vain, le coeur était lié, qu’on affranchit la
main.--Resurgam.--E. J. W.


355.--_Monday, June 21, 1852._

BOCAJ.--ALL’S WELL. A fearful blank in existence, caused by separation.
Hope is the greatest consolation. Time alone will set all right. Keep up
spirits for the sake of the ever-devoted one.--London, June 19, 1852.


356.--_Wednesday, June 23, 1852._

I AM AN ASS.--A letter is sent to your post-office, directed to my
bird’s name.


357.--_Wednesday, June 23, 1852._

MY Stature gives no inch, I throw away, and my bosom’s lord sits lightly
on his throne. Il faut qu’il finisse.--E. J. W.


358.--_Saturday, June 26-30, 1852._

E. A. S.--Nowley Rowley 4th and 7th.--July 3-22, Received.--The boat was
locked; a letter was waiting. The hour was not named. London address,
19, Clifford Street, Bond Street. Hall and Exhibition. I wish to see
you.


359.--_Tuesday, June 29, 1852._

YOUR GOOD FRIEND regrets the step you have taken. Can it not be recalled
till an explanation be given? Your honour and happiness are most
sincerely desired. Quant à moi, j’ai tout perdu par vous, je resterais
content si c’étoit pour vous, mais cette satisfaction m’est refusée.
Santé, biens, bonheur, touts departis. Soyez heureux. Bonne foi.


360.--_Thursday, July 1, 1852._

S. lmpi. F, npi C. qgnl & F, pil pink, C hgo & B hkq F. npi C qgnl. F,
qmk, C. okiq & npki F, npqm too, C omgk (nhqk) B pikl F, oimg a mpko.
khq. C hgo F. oimg an oph npgm for 3 mioq C klmh at F, npkl, B. mipn. F,
npqm too, C omgk F, qolg & mik at E. loqk for 6. F, hmkp. ikpg
Ex . . r . . t . . n. F oing olhi npog C holk F, nqgm ohiq mogk mqho
olhi C. iko B qkng & F. qolg S lmpi. F. ihpg hkpg onpm. C. kgql F. mik,
iomn hkom C qkin. F, oghm. hipo npkl. S mpqg.--J. de W.


361.--_Friday, July 2, 1852._

TO the + on the LETTER.--Believe nothing, except that the “Hair Chain”
is and ever will be faithful. Courage.


362.--_Monday, July 5, 1852._

WHERE the Teuton intermixes with the slave, and three of Neptune’s great
European tributaries have their source, and also vile man is restored by
the revivifying powers of nature; there, clothed in humility, sits
beauty enshrined in youthful loveliness. La fin ou la lutte--à toi
toujours.--E. J. W.


363.--_Monday, July 5, 1852._

BOCAJ.--All’s well! Every day lessens the dreadful separation. Being
obliged to agree with two dear tried friends, who saw the last, no other
communication can appear, but future benefit will fully repay the
present very great loss. Time and silence cannot part such faithfully
attached hearts. Farewell! Keep up spirits for the sake of the
ever-devoted one. All must end prosperously. July 3, 1852.


364.--_Tuesday, July 6, 1852._

K. W.--I am not changed. Why so unkind as to think so? But may not time
and absence lead you to forget, beset as you will be by trials and
temptations? Can you resolve to resist them? To remain firm and faithful
to the end? Forget not past dangers. Have confidence in the future.
Endure for a short time longer. Be cheerful; be happy; and be sure of
the constant devotion of one who doats on you.


365.--_Wednesday, July 7, 1852._

WONDERFUL! Thy star in conjunction with mine against the great globe
itself! nor Afric’s poisonous vapours, nor Asia’s caloric, nor America’s
life-absorbing ether, nor Europa’s invigorating breezes--fortune’s
sycophants, nor adversity’s treason--shall ever loose those sharp hooks
of steel with which I clasp thee to my heart;--France’s terpsichorean
votary, Rome’s javelined gladiator, and London’s belted champion, were
never lighter of foot, nor stronger of nerve, than Fortune’s spoilt and
favourite child.--E. J. W.


366.--_Friday, July 16, 1852._

IF the Writer is not mistaken, a certain party has been, is being, and
will continue to be trifled with by others, so long as absence is
preferred to presence.


367.--_Friday, July 16, 1852._

K. W.--How is it NO COMMUNICATION is received from Quebec upon points
respecting which candour and openness were entreated, that no mistake
might hereafter occur? You are besought to let nothing stand in the way
of such an explanation. Let it be full, unreserved, sincere--and be sure
the future must be happier to all parties by its being so. Conceal
nothing. Express your wishes distinctly--fearlessly. Do not suffer those
you love to act in the dark. If changed in any respect, hesitate not to
say so. God bless you. Write as before.


368.--_Monday, July 19, 1852._

ABSENCE is NOT PREFERRED to PRESENCE. No, no. But I must know positively
if this is from you. Then I should be only too glad to tell all
immediately.


369.--_Monday, July 19, 1852._

NO CHANGE has TAKEN PLACE.--All that has been hitherto attempted has
been with the view to furnish you with full particulars and a distinct
account of position and prospects, but it can only be done personally.
Adopt the means which have hitherto failed once more, and you shall be
put in possession of all you desire to know. Soyez heureux, and hold
fast the faith.--Wonderful--fragile not frail.


370.--_Wednesday, July 21, 1852._

ABSENCE--Presence.--The advertisement of the 16th (but no subsequent
one, mark this) was from G., who has had more reasons than one for
discontinuing a distant correspondence, on which no reliance could be
placed, when a nearer one was without effect. He is sure you do not know
all. The truth has been sacrificed; he does not say by whom, but not by
him. To this mode of correspondence he bids adieu.


371.--_Wednesday, July 21, 1852._

K. K.--The welcome LETTER is at last RECEIVED. Let similar ones follow,
but with more information, as promised and not sent. Be assured on the
subject about which you are anxious. Be patient; and above all things be
faithful to the deep trust reposed in you, and the reward you hope for
will surely follow. The attendant is going there (B--n), and will serve
the party you desire if possible. Have unlimited confidence on that
party’s good wishes to you.


372.--_Saturday, July 24, 1852._

TO the COUNTERFEIT.--Continue, and fill the coffers of this leviathan.
Like the statue wanting at the celebrated banquet, though absent, I am
all the more present.--E. J. W.


373.--_Friday, July 30, 1852._

X. K.--Yes, it does; but not the same party. You have seen other
friends, but do not tell me.


374.--_Saturday, July 31, 1852._

S. lmpi at. C. qgnl. F. pil, pink M. and P. Bhkq C qlin F. pil B. mipn
F. npi. C qgnl, C hgo F. iomg mhno E ngkp F. omnl. iqhp ihno, C. nhgq in
E. ngkp C klm at F, npkl. B qoil C mkop and F, npqo. qolg, iomn hkom
npqo lgiq B omgk F, hlnm oinp to E lino. F, omnl a mioq C. hgo. F. lmoh
hkom E mgqk. C. kmp C. hnol to be F mlgi pnmq to. B. qigk de W. C. C.
lgmh in. F. hnio. S lmpi at C. lhmn.--J. de W.


375.--_Wednesday, August 4, 1852._

X. K.--There is NEWS. Be prompt as possible.


376.--_Monday, August 9, 1852._

SIND sie GEWESEN? Jung Frau.--Ja. You are under a false impression as to
what your conduct should be. You should brave what you shrink from.
Occupation is arranged. Sleep in your own bed as soon as you can.


377.--_Wednesday, August 11, 1852._

AERONOMIC. 1852.


378.--_Friday, August 13, 1852._

K. W.--All right as to K. Very kind--very satisfactory--much prized.
Continue ever the same. Be cheerful, be happy. Look forward, banish
despair; feel sure brighter hours are at hand. If doubts sometimes
arise, it is because the interest felt is deep. Forgive, and--forget
not.--Haste.


379.--_Wednesday, September 1, 1852._

S. lkqo za and C. mgil knhp F. npi C. qgnl. S lmpk F npi C mqn nolk F.
mlgi S oglq C lnho omgk B qkng F, hnio mkiq Ede F. mlgi S lmgh Lolly F,
iomg at B pmik C hgo. F iomg in C olpn nhgq & qkin F, hkom npmq F, olk
oghm at F. npkl S pgkh M. S. ligm to F. hipo ogpm mioq C oplk D. r. .
ll. at C qgnl F oihp igqh mlqn log C mqn and qgnl mqn F. okni oihp hmkp
in E. nkmp D. . k. ns. Fiq hkom lpgh nlp.--Z. A.


380.--_Wednesday, September 1, 1852._

IT is enough: one man alone upon earth have I found noble. Away from me
for ever. Cold heart and mean spirit, you have lost what
millions--empires--could not have bought, but which a single word,
trustfully and nobly spoken, might have made your own to all eternity.
Yet are you forgiven; depart in peace; I rest in my Redeemer.


381.--_Saturday, September 4, 1852._

WHAT SURETY? Not my country’s dishonour. Wait until you are asked; you
never were, and never will be.--E. J. W.


382.--_Thursday, September 16, 1852._

TO the COUNTERFEIT.--Pitied, pardoned, and invited to continue.--E. J.
W.


383.--_Tuesday, September 21, 1852._

ANY intentions beyond those of the most sincere friendship, and of the
greatest esteem, exist in the instance referred to only in the mind of
“Suspense.”


384.--_Monday, October 4, 1852._

TO G.--I MAY NOT.--_Sept. 30._


385.--_Tuesday, October 5, 1852._

BOSTON.--Nightingale.--NO NEWS, but to give me information, and assist
if needful.--_Oct. 4._


386.--_Wednesday, October 13, 1852._

TO MY BELOVED EQUATOR.--Circumspice. Praeteren censco, Carthaginem esse
delendam. Serve the Queen; be just, and fear not; let all the ends thou
aim’st at be thy country’s, thy God’s, and truth’s--then if thou
fall’st, thou fall’st a blessed martyr. My country, my beloved country,
nothing but my country.--E. J. W.


387.--_Monday, October 18, 1852._

A LA CROIX ROUGE. Il se fera. Soit. E. J. W.


388.--_Saturday, October 23, 1852._

LEB’ WOHL! To the pearl of the great eastern sea, the blue-eyed maid of
Israel, who keeps watch near the impassable gate of dreary Scandinavia,
you cost one great man his place, and will also cost a great many more
their place--Leb’ Wohl!--E. J. W.


389.--_Tuesday, October 26, 1852._

TO my beloved EQUATOR.--Circumspice. Ungrateful Paris is dead; noble
Achilles resuscitated, and no longer vulnerable, even in his heel, sits
astride the Equator, and bids defiance, even on his own element, to
great Neptune himself. On to the State affairs. “Domine, dirige
nos.”--E. J. W.


390.--_Monday, November 1, 1852._

S lmpi at C. qgnl. F. pil pink C. klmh B qigk. F. qmlh to Roker, omnl
ikpg hkoq C nhgq. & B qkim F. qmkg qmp, ikho mioq mp the B. qlpm F. olhi
C ongh F. olq npi C qgnl lnho, F kol to be F lhok S oqln, the F. pkgo.
C. pmlq F. pngk S. niql 14th F, npkq to be F. hpl. S. onkl, by the F.
ignp of C ikgp. S. lmpi in F hnio & C lhma omgk F. qmkg omnl qoip C.
knho F oing npkl.--J. de W.


391.--_Monday, November 1, 1852._

FLYBYNIGHT WANTS the ANCHOR. It was expected all last week, and will be
every night this week. Come or write. Silence added to absence is a
cruel and unnecessary torture.


392.--_Wednesday, November 3, 1852._

SINCE “FRIDAY MORNING” I _Die_ hourly. Where are you, and when will you
return?--J. S.


393.--_Thursday, November 4, 1852._

A LA CROIX ROUGE.--Victoire. C’est fait. Soit. “Dieu me la donne, et
gure à qui la touche.”--E. J. W.


394.--_Friday, November 5, 1852._

CIRCUMSPICE.--Corruption falls or I fall. “Il est trop tard.”--E. J. W.


395.--_Monday, November 8, 1852._

MY STAR AGAINST the ENTIRE WORLD! Neither the golden mountain nor the
choicest beauty of Circassia shall ever sway my allegiance to my
country. Richelieu. The pillars of corruption shall fall.--E. J. W.


396.--_Wednesday, November 10, 1852._

FLYBYNIGHT WANTS the ANCHOR.--My dearest friend, you have solved this
problem wrongly, and are like Sisogenes, who made the error in the
Julian Calendar, which led to very ridiculous results. I will now play
Pope Gregory the 13th with you and set you right. Pride clothed in
humility was merely a means to an end--the reintegration of outraged
justice and the re-adjustment of her scales--and that end will be
accomplished.--E. J. W.


397.--_Thursday, November 11, 1852._

FLYBYNIGHT WANTS the ANCHOR. A kingfisher has stolen the Ring of it, and
Flybynight will founder.--E. J. W.


398.--_Friday, November 12, 1852._

VENTRE-à-TERRE.--Robb----o. Pardon. Thanks. Prove this false.--“Tis hard
to wine and thrive both in a year.”--S.


399.--_Monday, November 15, 1852._

FLYBYNIGHT WANTS the ANCHOR. My dearest friend, the meanest garret in my
native place, the eternal city, mighty London, is dearer to me than any
palace, from the purple waves of the Mediterranean to the murky
atmosphere of the Baltic. Pride, clothed in humility, though gifted with
the beautiful eyes of Napoleon, on the same degree of longitude that
made his fire new-stamped honour pass current, and though possessed of
Aladdin’s wonderful lamp, will never sway me from my allegiance to my
country--Richelieu. The pillars of corruption must fall.--E. J. W.


400.--_Tuesday, November 16, 1852._

FLYBYNIGHT WANTS the ANCHOR.--Solution--Invincible Achilles has pinioned
great Neptune to the Equator, seized his trident, and with his triumphal
car skimmed the boundless expanse of waters to hold communion with the
Pearl of the great Eastern sea; Scandinavia’s gate has been repassed,
and he now steers direct for the Pillars of Hercules: after razing
corrupt and perfidious Troy to the ground, he will glide over the purple
waves of the tideless sea, and pass in safety between the dreaded
whirlpool and the six-headed monster--then, and not till then, the
Kingfisher will restore the stolen ring, and honest pride, clothed in
humility, and beauty enshrined in youthful loveliness, will be his
ultimate reward! La lutte et (est) la fin.--E. J. W.


401.--_Friday, November 26, 1852._

ADVERTISE NO MORE.--November past, I came to London.--E. J. W.


402.--_Wednesday, December 1, 1852._

S lmpi at F. npkl, hoq. pgki C. nhgq is a F. hlkp no. F. mogh. B qkln F.
pngk at C pmkg. on the 9th F. lgkh qmp. a mogk noil C nhgq is at C.
qgnl. F. lgiq hoq khqp is oing to mpkh with C, qknp omgk hgo & kimh are
F qmlh to C, qgnl for F qoip Fiffy. F, ngli oimg, a mpko, qolg hlk. C.
ngqp. M. F. pgqn oghm to nqkg olhi hipo B qkm C. of F. hopn hkig pngk on
the 21st mpmh hlko in C nkol.--J. de W.


403.--_Tuesday, December 21, 1852._

S.--NO.--She will be out for six weeks. Have full faith and confidence,
and your reward shall be reaped.


404.--_Wednesday, December 22, 1852._

HEUREUX malheureux que je suis--I ain’t got not no money.--E. J. W.


405.--_Saturday, January 1, 1853._

S. lmpi F. npi npil pil pink. C. klmh, F. oimg ogq. khq lqkh ikpg ogqi,
lqoi qoin oing lqkh, hmig C, omgk F, npi npil qmk. C hgo, F, ploi omnl,
qoip, C qkin, F oing ihlm, ik, lmhn C nhgq F, iomn hkom. C. okiq F.
mqho, olhi C, iko. F olhi B. nlo, F. pgnq. kipo 17th S lmpi. F mpoh C
ngil B ogkg F npi npil qmk ikpg npkl. okgh. P. F. pil. M. Emhik lph hqpm
oilg quolg. nmkq ikpg npkl C. nkq S lmpi C kgql F, oing ihlm. mlgi mkiq
quhi koil lgoq lgqo. olhi B. qnp.--A. C.


406.--_Monday, January 10, 1853._

QUELLE JOURNÉE!--The proudest day of my life. He looked! ah! how did he
look? Like a man I visited two years ago in N----e. Tu comprendras.--E.
J. W.


407.--_Wednesday, January 12, 1853._

IT WON’T DO, I’m a true patriot.--E. J. W.


408.--_Friday, January 14, 1853._

IF E. J. W. did not oppose Mary (alias Emily) Pierce Crawford, daughter
of Daniel Mereweather Ford, he would have applied, ere this, at 4,
Spring-place, Black Lion lane, Hammersmith. A wilful error is maintained
against justice, however, and truth to oppose my right. Why not come
immediately?


409.--_Saturday, January 15. 1853._

SILENCE!


410.--_Tuesday, January 18, 1853._

SILENCE, Where?


411.--_Wednesday, January 19, 1853._

WHERE? Has my mission been fulfilled, or does vice prevail! That is the
question.--E. J. W.


412.--_Wednesday, January 19, 1853._

SILENCE, WHERE! Why! “Silence in the Metropolis:” Silence on the railway
is good, but “Silence in the Metropolis,” remember, is excessively
better.


413.--_Friday, January 21, 1853._

INCORRUPTIBLE.--E. J. W.


414.--_Tuesday, January 25, 1853._

DIOGENES his LANTERN NEEDS NO MORE; An honest man is found, the search
is o’er.

  Incorruptible.--E. J. W.


415.--_Tuesday, January 25, 1853._

ALPHA the First, and GEORGE are Deceived. No mission but that of misery
and ruin has ever been fulfilled. ’Tis cruel to add falsehood to
injuries. Nor have I ever granted a person power to act for me.
Incorruptible innocence need not shun the light.--Mary Emily,
Hammersmith.


416.--_Wednesday, January 26, 1853._

THE KEY.--It is, and ever was, the favourite of the upright merchant
Prince, not the prude of the coarse knight of the shuttle. Now you have
my real motive of action--“blighted happiness.” Incorruptible.--E. J. W.


417.--_Thursday, January 27, 1853._

A LA CROIX ROUGE.--Victoire; c’est fait; soit. Que nos destinées
s’accomplissent. Incorruptible.--E. J. W.


418.--_Friday, January 28, 1853._

CORRUPTION’S Dead; the victory is ours. “Virtue no longer of vice shall
pardon beg.” Incorruptible.--E. J. W.


419.--_Monday, January 31, 1853._

LE JEU est MORT; vive le jeu.--E. J. W.


420.--_Tuesday, February 1, 1853._

S. lmpi ongm, kgip C. omkp. F. hlqn. oqhi E. qlhp. C. qknp. F. klmh khq
oing a lgns. F, qoip. nvgm, C. qknp F, kpom lphk, C, nkim, hqn F, hkom.
C, kioq F. oimn. C omgk, F, lnqh qlnk E--nkmp C, nhgq F, oing hnio, S.
oqlp C. okiq F, oimg B. k. F lmqi C. phno.--A. C. B.


421.--_Wednesday, February 2, 1853._

CENERENTOLA.--N. bnxm yt ywd nk dtz hfs wjfi ymnx fsifr rtxy fscntzx yt
mjfw y mf esi, bmjs dtz wjyzws, fsi mtb qtsldtz wjrfns mjwj. It bwnyf f
kjb qnsjx jfwqnsl, uqjfxj. N mfaj gjjs ajwd kfw kwtr mfuud xnshj dtz
bjsy fbfd.


422.--_Thursday, February 3, 1853._

TO the HERCULEAN PILLAR (37), or Alpha the First.--The PAPERS of 1843
and 6, destined for Mary Emily, daughter of Daniel Mereweather Ford,
deceased, were INTERCEPTED and transferred to another. Insulting
Oppression reigns to mislead, and is opposed to Justice and Truth. Apply
at 4, Spring-place, Hammersmith.


423.--_Tuesday, February 8, 1853._

G--, Arthur, and E. J. W. are inexcusable in absenting themselves from
the Two Indescribables. Do not leave under a wilful delusion. Fear not.
Apply personally at 4, Spring-place, Hammersmith. All communication is
intercepted in England and abroad, and our reputations calumniated to
render us homeless and friendless. Deceit prevails.


424.--_Friday, February 11, 1853._

ROSE.--Il. si. For. A. O. P. ⁎. 2 will not be too soon. Ed.


425.--_Friday, February 11, 1853._

CENERENTOLA.--Zsyng rd mjfwy nx xnhp mfaj n ywnji yt kwfrj fs
jcugfifynts ktw dtz, gzy hfssty. Xnq jshj nx xfsjxy nk ymf ywzj nx sty
xzx jhyji; nk ny nx, fgg xytwnjx bngg gj xnkyji yt ymj gtyytr. It dtz
wjrjrgjw tzw htzxns x hnwxy uwtutxnynts: ymnsp th ny.


426.--_Tuesday, February 15, 1853._

CENERENTOLA.--Until my heart is sick, have I tried to frame an
explanation for you, but cannot. Silence is safest if the true cause is
not suspected: if it is, all stories will be sifted to the bottom. Do
remember our cousin’s first proposition. Think of it.--n pstb Dtz.


427.--_Friday, February 18-21, 1853._

SHE is RETURNED. But where is the fulfilment of those brilliant
promises? Forgive past omissions, all shall be explained. Faith is in
the ascendant. Write or indicate - +, if possible, before the 22nd, as I
may be out a week.--Valentine. S.


428.--_Saturday, February 19, 1853._

CENERENTOLA.--What nonsense! Your cousin’s proposition is absurd. I have
given an explanation--the true one--which has perfectly satisfied both
parties--a thing which silence never could have effected. So no more
such absurdity.


429.--_Tuesday, March 1, 1853._

S lmpi F. npi npkl. & pink. nqkg olhi qmpl. C omkq F. lqkh npqo. hnlo,
npki C. omgk F. oing hnio qmk omnl khil, ihno C nqh B onhi F. olhi E
npqh. F. iomn npqm. C. nhgq nmkq C klmh, F, oing npki B. qkng F, oing.
nlqg lmhn. nmkq ikpg, imok. D. imk F oing. lqkh hmig oimg a mpho. qolg.
F, oihm. S mqog F, npqm. minq ikqo. omnl 22. F, hiqo hmng hnil lqlp
iglp. omnl hkmi hkom noip ogk lqip hikl iom hopi iqhp.--A. C.


430.--_Tuesday, March 8, 1853._

TO my dear GRANDPAPA, of May 23, 1848.--Though held cordially tight,
alas! no better did alight than the good man of 1848. Your child you
loved so well is in great anxiety, and implores you to grant her an
INTERVIEW. Address immediately, in her own name, at Standly’s, 61,
Post-office, Brook-street, Bond-street.


431.--_Thursday, March 24, 1853._

FLYBYNIGHT has GOT the ANCHOR. Corruption wins, and England’s lost.--E.
J. W.


432.--_Tuesday, March 29, 1853._

REPLIES to QUESTIONS;--Not going. Yes. Yes, if I possibly can. Yes. Yes;
none.


433.--_Wednesday, March 30, 1853._

ACHILLES has GOT the LEVER. Corruption sinks, and virtue swims. E. J. W.


434.--_Friday, April 8, 1853._

F. G.--Mind not A., but remember B. Do not forget the silkworm’s tree.
Think of China’s temples and of tea, of Hesperia’s sky and its blue sea.


435.--_Saturday, April 9, 1853._

HOFER was BETRAYED; Charette was betrayed; but God has protected me. I
have fought the good fight; I have gained the good cause; now let me
die.--Leb’ wohl. Adieu.--E. J. W.


436.--_Wednesday, April 13, 1853._

S. T. R.--Having had occasion to imagine that a very unwarrantable and
most absurd accusation has arisen against a party, of attempting to
personate some one of distinction, whom he decidedly never saw, and
considering all things could serve but to bring upon him well-deserved
ridicule. Should such an error exist, of course it gains consistency,
and if only ideal, this will ultimately produce the desideratum (of
re-establishing faith in the mind of the communicative party). “Silence
has proved itself in this case not to be wisdom,” as only one honest
word at the origin of this ridiculous delusion would have proved its
fallacy and the prevalence of truth over slander. Communicate frankly by
letter to X. Y. Z. 85, Borough High-street, Southwark.


437.--_Thursday, April 14, 1853._

M. N.--You are right in your conjecture, there is a difficulty. It may
be necessary to lessen the time by a month. Write exactly what you feel
on the subject; and arrange, if you can, for me to communicate direct.
The name of your mercury will be sufficient.--S. T.


438.--_Thursday, April 14, 1853._

W. B. B.--How absurd it is of your parents to anger me, and to threaten
me with law, when one word from you would answer every purpose. You
cannot have received my letter of Saturday. How shameful to mistrust,
you who have ever been so dutiful a child, and who now sacrifice your
feelings to satisfy them.--W. B. B.


439.--_Saturday, April 16, 1853._

TO G.--The hope of one who could have sincerely perished for thee is
utterly destroyed. The Unknown Admirer feels acutely the grief and pain
the past must have occasioned in the mind of G. Forgive the past, and
no more will be heard of the sincere Unknown Admirer.--Paris.


440.--_Thursday, April 21, 1853._

+ VACILLATE Not; be true and faithful, and you will be rewarded. Any
name which you give will be answered at poste restante.


441.--_Thursday, April 21, 1853._

S. T. R.--Second Appeal.--Would you play the philanthropist’s part, and
act as mediator to remove that profound mystery which prevails (I think)
equally on both sides? Not having heard of the nature of the fault
imputed to me, I could not justify myself in publishing a denial to what
possibly never existed. I anxiously await a candid explanation before I
proceed, for in my state of doubt reason imposes silence, which
oft-times is the evidence of guilt; but as you must be fully convinced
that I could now have no motive in continuing the deception, whatever
you may suppose me formerly to have had, state where letters can reach
you. Address (as before) to X. Y. Z. W’s letter duly arrived, but the
tone of it I cannot understand.


442.--_Saturday, April 30, 1853._

S. to W.--Your WIFE wishes to JOIN YOU, but must first know more. Your
first letter is not received. You may trust me. It is out of the power
of my friends to promise secrecy, others being concerned; but they will
not voluntarily expose you to injury. H. has another important letter
for you.


443.--_Monday, May 2, 1853._

H. V.-- ----. My life is at your service. What would you have me to
do?--April 30.


444.--_Friday, May 6, 1853._

I CLAIM the authorship, as I have daily and hourly renewed the oath, of
that Symbol, through an interval of estrangement long enough to have
effaced the inscription on my tomb. My altered abode you know, and the
ordinary medium of communication is open to you.


445.--_Saturday, May 7, 1853._

ALEEKEPHALESKEPASTEER must WAIT--the summer is before him.


446.--_Monday, May 9, 1853._

WERE it my heart alone, let it break--others’ lot and misery are
involved in “Aleekephaleskeepasteer”----Decision.


447.--_Tuesday, May 10, 1853._

ALEEKEPHALESKEPASTEER, compare the copy with the will in
Doctor’s-commons.


448.--_Tuesday, May 10, 1853._

EXCELSIOR has PERISHED. The banner which he has borne for years with
pride has fallen from his grasp,--its colours tarnished by a
pestilential atmosphere. The ice has touched his heart, which will never
thaw again.


449.--_Wednesday, May 11, 1853._

THE FUNERAL was a PRIVATE ONE. “Aleekephaleskepasteer.”


450.--_Wednesday, May 11, 1853._

C. A.--N 4 M S S--4 H Q O--T H M 40--M G--B A N N M E S O--4 A: P j--F S
Q E--E S O N N--J A Q.--A S. May 9.


451.--_Thursday, May 12, 1853._

ALEEKEPHALESKEPASTEER--Your GUARDIAN is now in LONDON, but leaves for
Genoa on the 18th proximo.


452.--_Friday, May 13, 1853._

THIS means of CORRESPONDENCE is both EXPENSIVE and MYSTERIOUS. I can
neither afford the one, and I hate the other. “Aleekephaleskepasteer.”


453.--_Saturday, May 14, 1853._

ALEEKEPHALESKEPASTEER. See Mr. Melton at once, tell him all.


454.--_Monday, May 16, 1853._

ALL is EXPLAINED.--I have been to Regent-street, and seen Mr.
Melton.--ALEEKEPHALESKEPASTEER.


455.--_Thursday, May 26, 1853._

IRELAND.--J.--May 10.


456.--_Thursday, May 26, 1853._

TO O-- ----. M--C P--R A 4 F L C R R O T--E Q 4 F C R R A 4--T H M 40--J
04--F--E--M N--L O H O--K A T--E S O--N N--J A Q. 050 H--4 L M R O--A T
R.--O S N M O.--S--ss. May 24th.


457.--_Wednesday, June 1, 1853._

S lmpi F. npi C qgnl F pil pink C qkin F oimg a mpko qolg mnhg 8th hlk C
kmgo hgik F. khqp nikg qmlh npqm S. oqlp F. qik oing C. klmh F. omnl
ikho hmnp C nhgo & F. omgk inqg nmkq hnio, S. a. n. c. y. F. mogi npi
mqph C hgo F inqg nmkq mogl C minp pmog F. mlgi mkhg C hgo F. lqkl 28th
omp C. kgql F. mlgi nmkq nhop lgoq mqho olhi hipo nqgm nqkg hipo olq
qmkg hqpk mngi ikmq ikmn qpl mikg olhi a hlkp ihlm npqo nokg F. hmng
inqg nghm. npih lqoi. ikpg mkio oqgp ogpk ngl qmp hipo. C. nolk. F. qhnl
C (knhp) F. oimg khq 23rd omp B nkmo. S lmoq F. npi. C. mqn.--J. de W.


458.--_Thursday, June 9, 1853._

TO “ETIAMNUM IMMUTATUS, &c.,” de Maii 2 et Junii 1.--Vide responsa mea
in “Tempora” Maii 6ti (“I claim,” &c.), 14th (“The Author, &c.”) et 20mi
(“There can be, &c.”) Tunc tu scribe mihi, et ego rescribam. En onomatos
mei grammata initiatia, ordine inverso.--E. R.


459.--_Monday, June 13, 1853._

JONATHAN, the son of Saul’s brother, WANTS his FATHER
pressingly.--Portland-place.


460.--_Tuesday, June 21-24-29, 1853._

IF F. C. H. is living she is implored to WRITE.

  All is forgiven. Nothing forgotten.

    “And ever and anon of grief subdued
    “There comes a token.”


461.--_Wednesday, June 22-23, 1853._

SNATCH t. h. o. b. M. L. Roses. b. b. t. d. (Feb. 19.) WRITE in your own
name. The obligation appreciated, and ever remembered. Advise and aid.
Give the opportunity.


462.--_Friday, June 24, 1853._

WHAT you propose would be a most fatal step. Break off no engagements,
but write and give me a safe address where I may send a letter.--Apollo.


463.--_Friday, July 1, 1853._

TO be INSERTED JULY 1st.--(Some of the signs are not in type; send
figures instead.*) nb wziormt blfi ovg.gvi nfxs ximhloow nv kivkzirmt gl
uloold nb nlgsvih olevw ivnzrmh. Ovg fa vevi pook rm ervd gsz.g yovhhvw
hzerln gl dsln blf wrivxg nv--gsvm dv nzb rmwvvw xzoxfoz.gv fklm
szkkrmvhh gvnklizo--vgvimzo. Nb hrhgvi rh hzwob wrhgivhhvw, hsv hvmwh.
svi olev. Nb yrigswzb rh gsv vovevmgs lu zftfhg. Yv mlg wrhzkk-lrmgvw rn
gsv urihg hslfow mlg zodzbh yirmt gsv ovggvi zh rgrh wruurxfog gl tvg
gsvn rm gsv vezxg wzb. R mvevi hzd nb nlgsvi zugvi ovzermt blf, mlg vevm
rm wvzgs zh gsv xtuurm dzh xolhvw yvuliv r ziirevw Dirgv gl nv zh lugvm
zh blf xzm zh rgrh nb lmob kovzhfiv *r szev blfi kvmxro.*


464.--_Monday, July 4, 1853._

JULY 1st.--Glfg vhg xlnkirh! Vxireva vm xsruuiv vg ivmwva--nlr nlm
xizblm!!


465.--_Thursday, July 7, 1853._

M. C.--ANSWER to Nos. 4 & 5. Fear not. All’s well. They will not
stray.--Your Own.


466.--_Saturday, July 9, 1853._

Qbe’bl.--zanoyhgk -- zahgdy -- iel’ybgny -- Khxebgn -- dbgk -- Mh’gs --
suox -- elzlx -- fs -- yuel -- jugyuchzbug -- Koxbgn -- pushnl -- ql --
hxl -- um -- glplx -- knoiz -- fs -- eupl -- mux suo -- nuk -- iely --
suo -- Khxebgn.


467.--_Wednesday, July 13, 1853._

Qbe’bl.--Suox el’zlx by hnhbg nol’ylk! Zxs ugjl fuxh!! Mh’gs.


468.--_Tuesday, July 26, 1853._

TO C. A.--I dluoc ton og ot eht hcnual fo Cressy. I deen ton yas woh
hcum ti detnioppasid dna dessertsid em ot ssim gniees ruoy raed ecaf,
hguoht I dluoc ton evah nekops ot ym Eisle. Dog evreserp uoy. A raey
txen Yadsendew ecnis ew detrap. Etirw noos, sa erofeb. Eniht nwo.--Yllo.


469.--_Monday, August 1, 1853._

N. B. wvzivhg z. blfi olmt vckvxgvw ovggvi zg ozhg ziirevw, rgsrmp blf
dviv dilmt rni kilnrhrmt blfi hrhgvi gl dirgv hl hvowln. Kizb ivnvnyvi
dszy blf kilnrhvw nv dsvm blf tl gl gsv hoz. Blf ulitlg gl hvmw no
urtfivh uli dliwh, wl hl vhkyxrzoob uli gsv hnzoo lmvh, zmw gslhv dsrxs
lxxfi nlhg lugvm, rwrwmlg hvmw gsoyllph Xfnnrmth rhz xovevi dllp. rdrhs
rdviv drgs blf gl ivzw gltvgsoi. Nb hrhgvi rh yvggvi, hsv rh orermt zg
Xsvhsfmg zg kivhvmg, yfg gsv slfhv droo yv pvkglm. Rvckvxy gl tlgl
Hxlgozmw rmz dvop. yfg dirgv zh Yvuliv.* rh dvoo. Rtzev srn dszg blf
hvmg zmw vmervwsrn rollp ulidziw gl gsv vovemgs.--T L W yovhh blf blfi
ldm.*


470.--_Thursday, August 4, 1853._

S. lmpi F. npi npkl. pil pink B qkng F. ikmp iqhlpkoi nmkq nhop C qkin
lgi F. pil ikpg qolg C hgo F. pil C. kmgo F. npi C. qgnl klmh F npi npkl
C. omgk F. inqg nmkq hnio nikl lngi oing ikph lqom C. hgo F. npi mhno
mogl C nhgq F. hkom mkhq C pmog F. hlnm hqi F. pil C qgnl F. igqh mlqn
ogpi. C okiq F. kion nmkq C phno. ngil. F. oghm, nmkq phqm S lknq C kgql
F. mlo S koh F. mhqo C nkh F. pil C qhg F. nmkq E mgqk, F. omnl ikhoi
mioq F, omnl ikpq oqlm ogl oghm. hipo npkl. pgki C. opqh.--J. de W.


471.--_Saturday, August 13, 1853._

KENSINGTON.--Ftmf ftq nqzf ar qliqdk ymze yuzp etagxp ng raxxiqp uz tue
qpgomfuaz mzp az tue pqefuzmfuaz uz xurg ne azq ar ftq ymjuye itust tme
nqqz arfqz dqbqmfup ngf itnot omzzaf nq mpyuffgp inftagf gmzl
dgefduofuazo.


472.--_Wednesday, August 17, 1853._

KENSINGTON.--Kagd okbtqd ne ympq agf, ngf egot saap ymjuye etagxp nq
iduffqz uz bxmuz qzsxust, ftmf mxx yustf nqzqruf.


473.--_Thursday, August 18, 1853._

TO KENSINGTON.--That the bent of every man’s mind should be followed in
his education and destination in life is one of the maxims which has
been often repeated, but which cannot be admitted without many
restrictions.


474.--_Friday, August 19, 1853._

NB wziormtz--Mvvw rhzb sld wvortsgvw rdzh gl ivxvrev blfi ovggvi 2 wvzi
ivnyizmxv lm nb yrigswzb. Ryvt blf mlg gl gsrmp rdilgv fmwvi xmb
riirgzgrlm. 3 Ruvzi nb ovggvih yvrmt ivzw yb lgsvih 4 rxlmuzmvw nbhvou
gl uxxgh 2 vevmgh--Rzn mid zg Znfoirv, mvzi Wfmpvow, Kvigshsriv 3 blf
szw yvggvi dirgy zh yvuliv. Rwrw mlg yoznv blf uli zwsvirmt gl blfi
kilnrhy 3 uli nzprmtrg ru blf pmvd 1 glb 2 tozwmvhh blfi ovggvih yirmt
nv blf dlfow ulitrev zmb szhgrmvhh Tlw yovhh blf ili zoo 1 prmwmvhh 2
olev gsvb nzmruvhg. Rzn wldm sviv ivzwrmt znrw yvzfgrufo hxvmvib. Rdroo
xloovxg 1 uvimh sld hszoo Rhvmw gsvn. Trev nzt nb olev 2 gvoo svi Rwlmg
ztivv drgs svi zylfg svi xlmwfxg.--Rszev mlg hoom lfi wvzi uirvmw Blfi
ovggvi wrw mlg ziirev groo gsv 13th, hl Rxlfow mlg homw gsrh yvuliv
dirgv hllm 4 Rnzb zmhdvi lm gsv 1st ru klhhryov zh vevi blfi ldm*.


475.--_Monday, August 22, 1853._

EAST!!! N45 bln r4ch3s2g Eg12sh e42bh a2v313-bli2an n45h . . Ea2lh2 v3k2
b2 h4b2iw3cv i4 s4 u4g n45 w2g2 lh 3l 3h alb2cilqan 85aa. 1w2 u45g
b4ciwh v4 k2gn na4 E.--A. W.


476.--_Thursday, August 25, 1853._

TO KENSINGTON (m. n. o., etc.)--Ftq gzpqdmszqp tme ragzp agf kagd okbtqd
mzp Ftue rad kagd squpmzoq.--M. Sdqqw in Manchester.


477.--_Wednesday, August 31, 1853._

ZAMPA.--It came, and was as water in the Desert. Ten thousand thanks.
All shall be done; but the time is long to wait. No more at present. The
straw is in use. Look again in a week. Look always, and take heed. There
will be no more until there is the return.--Adieu.


478.--_Thursday, September 1, 1853._

NB Wvzivhg z. Lfi ozhq xbksvi szh yvvm ivzw hl rnfhg xazmtvry Rgdzh
rmgsv Grnvh zuligmrtsg ztl. Ruthg dirgv glblf zmwhvmw blf zmyd
xibkgltizhs. Ovgnv pmld dsviv Rxzm dirgv kllgv Svhgzmgv dsviw blfxzm
irwy lfg zolmv zmw togrg--*


479.--_Thursday, September 1, 1853._

S. lmpi F. npi. C qgnl. F. mhqo opnl qmnp lph C qkin. lgi F. npi C qgnl
F. hkom ikpq khq pil opki iknq olq onql qolg B. pnmh F. mkhg S. F. hkom
C klmh F. oinl B qgli. C. nkh F. inqg nmkq C holm. F. hmig C. hgo. F.
npi npkl. iq hlnm hqi pil. C qgnl F. nmkq ophq lqoi pig C kgql F. mlgi
2nd oinq lqkh mg omnl plg C qkip S. F. qmkg C. ngil F. oghm npkl ikmn
npkl ngli mik logk npkl qlgo. C qlin qkin B. hkq C lgi F. pil. C hgo. F
oghm hipo lgkh. qik oing hnio ikpn.--T. B. C.


480.--_Saturday, September 3-6, 1853._

L. T. H.

    “Si de jeunesse on doit attendre beau coloris,
    “Palleur, qui marque une âme tendre, a ses attractions si.”
                   C’est assi?


481.--_Wednesday, September 7, 1853._

TO A.----Nb--wzivrmt Z. R. znhfwwvmob xzoovw glolmwim kizb dirgv
rnnvwrzzvob 2 wrivxg blfi-orggvi gi. W. M. klhgluurxv .Sow Xzeomwrhs
Hgwvg Olmwlm R szw szwml grnvgl nzpv 2 hvmw zmlgsvi xbksvi. zh vevi
blfildm.


482.--_Wednesday, September 21, 1853._

FLO.--1821 82374 29 30 84541. 185270 924 184 182 82460. 84 314 8842 31
8599420 31 8355 7239241 8218. 726 85400 021.


483.--_Thursday, September 29, 1853._

FLO.--828 3 5284 021. 30 84541 30 932327 924 021. 7234 526 3441 34. 1821
82374 29 30 8454.


484.--_Saturday, October 1, 1853._

S. lmpi F. npi npkl. pil pink P. M. C qlin Bogki F. oing hnio S ompi
Bhkq F. iomn hkom C hgo. F. nmkq mogl C okiq F. pil C nphi klmh Bqigk F.
qik mlih nmkq hnio nmkq lgkh C. olni Bqlpm F oing mlgi ikpg lgqp ohkg
npi npi hlnm. hqi C nkh F. inqg nmkq C. holm F. qmkg nmkq lgkh C. qknp
Sh . . w . . l F. nhmp S mhl C kgql F. npmh hlkp mg F. mkiq
Sh . . w . . l C igpo mkqi F. ikho qolg npi C qgnl F. npkl lngi komq
omnl qoip Bplmq C. mkop F npi mknp phin mhno E. lipg.--A. C. B.


485.--_Tuesday, November 1, 1853._

EAST.--Rbtszsqny h. d. rmdzj qdbnlld--mer sgd onr vntcz kdssdq ad rzed
eqnl rtbg chrgnmdrsx? Sghr lxogdq hr khjd sgd kzrs rths-dc sn sgd R N V
D R S hmsdkkdbs Sgd Oqdrr hrvnqsgx ne Rbts zsqny!!! tfg!


486.--_Tuesday, November 1, 1853._

S lmpi. F. npkl -- pink -- C. qlin -- B -- ogki F oim -- nmkp -- hnio --
P. & M. F. hkom -- C. higl S. ompi -- F. hmip -- ihlm -- B -- phlq --
F -- ikpg -- F. hqpl -- F. hnio -- S onpm -- C. limq qlpn -- F -- olhi --
C. hplm -- okiq. -- npki -- F. olhi -- C -- phno.C -- hgo -- B -- hkq --
F. olhi -- mhno. mogl -- qik -- oing -- ihlm -- hnio -- S. onkh -- D --
olg -- F. ngli -- olmn -- lgmq hlgk lokp -- hoq -- npi ikpg -- qink --
lqoi -- lghk -- F. lihm -- nmkq. kglm -- qpgk-nmkq -- qogi. -- J. de
W--


487.--_Monday, November 14, 1853._

THE PILLARS.--Mason, those pillars are not sound; don’t you fear they
will fall? No; they are more durable than the thrones of kings.--E. J.
W.


488.--_Friday, November 18, 1853._

A. G. B. 50th.--The POPLARS are Desolate now, and Dangerous Point very
unattractive. You see we fulfil the promise.--A--a A--s.


489.--_Wednesday, November 30, 1853._

IF this should MEET the EYE of the poor old DEAF LADY, the bonnet,
shawl, and brougham can be identified.


490.--_Thursday, December 15, 1853._

CREATURE.--Y A T X 8 E 7 Z 2 E B O X 7 A Z U S O E X 2 A 4 Z Y U K O 6 E
M T O X U Z 2 E B O X M O O 7 Z K U 7 8 0 X U Z T O V P X W A S Z M T O
K K X Y A T Z P E H O X 8 E 6 Z A V Z Y A T 6 K O T X.


491.--_Saturday, December 17, 1853._

WHY deal in personalities? He withdrew, fearing your lively imagination
would draw, in your next, a vivid description of himself, with the nook
and bog from whence he sprung, to the terror of his friends; but his
fears are now allayed.--Wednesday.--Adieu. +


492.--_Wednesday, December 21, 1853._

FLO.--1821 82374 29 30 84541 8 53 02 522540. 8 3300 021 3244 1852 4844.
8 5227 51 02 14 9371144 48440 23781. 8 0426 021 52. 326352 08585 12 8459
42116 021 88354 505449 59144 632244. 31. 8355 7449 021 8543 526 021 3101
95270 1851 31 5430 544 42126 021. 726 85 400 021


493.--_Friday, December 23, 1853._

DOMINOES.--czo -- fbzj -- 62 -- bhz4 -- bhz6 -- 9274 -- 5c56h4 --
3420hlzh5 -- 8c6d -- y27 -- c6 -- 5d285 -- 9274 -- z76d24c69 -- 827bj --
6dz6 -- c -- dzj -- z5 -- 07xd -- 8cbb9 -- jc7h5 -- 8cbd -- 0h -- 17 --
g4cjz9. -- dh -- 6zbk5 -- 2g -- f2clf -- zy42zj.


494.--_Friday, December 23, 1853._

FLO.--184 5501 850 84227 8449451 31. 1821 82374 29 30 84541 8 53 02
522450. 8 3300 021 3244 1852 4844. 8 5227 51 0214 9371144 48140 23781. 8
0426 021 52 326352 08585 12 8459 42126 021 88354 505449 59144 63224. 31
8 355 7449 021 8543 526 021 3101 95270 1851 30 5430 544 42126 021. 726
85400 021. 828 8 62 5284 021.


495.--_Monday, January 2, 1854._

EAST! Zanoni Yboko z. jo wn. m?--n : n En. yn n : bn· go z·kn : kbz·ce
kn·--n· nzo. Ebojo n : l n : k n : fgn kkn : zeo En· Eoee wn· m bny
iez·n n : z·f Ebb En :--fo bz·k an·fo.


496.--_Monday, January 2, 1854._

FLO.--30 282 5284 8 53 85990 57532 31 30 5374 5857327 94.23 5 856 64453.
021 544 30 5394 12 7228 1851 18444 30 5 785.274 29 044327 021 12 8454
9423 021 12 62 183270 12 4221 78. 8 08555 140 526 044 021 0222 84314 12
34 50 29142 50 021 752 726 85400 021 1821 82174 29 30 84541.


497.--_Monday, January 3, 1854._

S. lmpi. F. npi. C. qgnl F pil pink npkl. qlgo M. P. C omgk F. pil C
qlin B hkg F. hkom B qkng F nmkq hnio ikph iomn ikph hqon mioq B pimk F.
hqpl lqip ohin oilg hmkp hqon B qmnp F. mgk. qpoi okgh C okiq hgo. F.
pil C klmh F. ikph C klmh F. pil. pion qolk. npi. C qgnl F. omnl. qoip
S. lmpn F. lqoi hipo, C. omkq F. klih hnq C olqh. F. qgli. ohig oiqk.
imkq mlp hipo. mqho. olhi C. mgil F. lq kh qoin. M. P. F. hnpq ikqm no.
ikpg S. ongm F. lqoi hipo, P. lgoq mqho. E. mlhg F. lgiq lqin ikmn lqip
mioq.--J. de W.


498.--_Friday, January 6, 1854._

FLO.--1821 82374 29 39 84541. 828 8 62 5284 021. 828 544 021 08555 021
84 5536 19 1830. 094327. 8 752 044 021 8557327 8318 0214 6545327 8851 8
82156 7884 12 84 8318 021. 185270 924 0214 5501 541144 8 9454 2218327
811 0495451322 9423 021 021 544 30 82456 30 5394 30 8294. 1821 3244 1852
5394 95448455 726 85400 021.


499.--_Wednesday, January 11, 1854._

M. M. M.--The hands will be never still. I wait anxiously for a letter,
before I go to my mother for three or four weeks.--M. M. M.


500.--_Thursday, January 12, 1854._

WHY SHAVE?


501.--_Saturday, January 14, 1854._

DO YOU REALLY THINK of the HELPLESS?--The drawing-room floor is ready;
pray say the word, and the lawyers will be put to work, and provision
made for you by an old friend for my sake; so cast your Saxon’s
fears to the winds. Where do you draw? Alas! for the lost
opportunity.--Edgware-road, 13th February.


502.--_Saturday, January 21, 1854._

CARNAGE.--J P and J L to Thetr Oupen Tmi L touh Ill.--H Y T., or send
all further applications respecting the A. of H. to the D. of P.


503.--_Wednesday, February 1, 1854._

S. lmpi F. npi npkl pil. pink C hgo. F. oing hkom a qmih ikhl phqm klim
mnig qik lqkn qmlp hkom npmq C nhgq F. nmkq mogl C omgk qlin F. npi
npkl. C nkh F. komq olhi E. mgqk F. mikn nmlo C. okiq npki F. npi E.
qlhp B. hkq F. hkom B qkng F. lgqk olhi ikpg lgmq S. kghq F. npi C. nomq
F. mlq hlog D. olg. F. igiq nikg--A. C. B.


504.--_Wednesday, March 1, 1854._

S lmpi F. npi. C qgnl F. pil pink C. omgk F, hkom C. klmh F. hlnk nikg
oghm npqo lgpn golg. C. lnho. F. oing mogl. ikpn qmlh lgmq B qkng F,
hkom, npqo olmh qolg qmlh lgmq niql lmok. C. npgq F, iomn hkon mkhq C.
pmog F, mpko. C lmoh F. nikg hkom. npqo C. hkq F. hkom B qkng F, nmkq
hnio C hgo. F. npi E lipg F, mpng lqoi npmh lgk pilk ikph omnl lqip hipo
S. pikl F. hoq hmng. oghm hipo nmkq lgkh C. qkin F, pil npqo h on qoig S
lmpi C. okiq F. inqg npi E. qlhp F, mhqo C nkh F, komq olhi. E. mgqk. S
lmpi.--J. de W.


505.--_Friday, March 17, 1854._

NOURMAHAL.--65, 2, 18.


506.--_Friday, March 24-27-29-31-April 3-5-8-10-12-15th, 1854._

BOKINGA. May, 1854. [Illustration: ‬ﻱﺭ ﻦﺗ ﺭ ﻮﺑ ه‮ ]


507.--_Saturday, April 1, 1854._

S lmpi F. npi C. qgnl. F. pil pink C. klmh F. oing mpko qolg hlk S oqli
17th C oplk hgpl F. oing lqkh hmig C. omgk F. hlnm. F. oing mlp mlgi S
pkol F. ihim C hqgi B hnq lqknp olmp F. oing ihlm mlgi C. ogli kgno S
ogin F khqp lmqk npi Enpqh B. qsng C. klmh qkin nhgq F. nhpq hopn npi E.
mkpi. S oqkp C hgo. E. lipg F. qik ogl F. oghm phnm npkl. S. oqki F.
khg. mqho. oing lqpi ompl hipo. S. oqlp F. hnq ikpg D. mqp.--J. de W.


508.--_Wednesday, April 5, 1854._

QUAL gioia e stato il rivederti. Deh! non rimprovernie; un inganno
infelice e stato la colpa di . . . . mi perdona et m’olvide!--S. T.


509.--_Saturday, April 8, 1854._

QUAL gioia et stato per me il rivedirti. Deh! non rimprovermi! Un
inganno infelice e stato la colpa di . . . mi perdona--et m’oivida.


510.--_Wednesday, April 19, 1854._

FAULKNER-STREET.--Second RECEIVED.--I have racked my brain, but cannot
for the life of me divine your object. Write again to unravel the
mystery. “Hope deferred maketh the heart sick.”


511.--_Saturday, April 22, 1854._

FAULKNER-STREET.--_Post-Office_, 28, Queen’s-row, Pimlico, opposite the
Royal Mews.


512.--_Friday, April 28, 1854._

X. X. X.


513.--_Monday, May 1, 1854._

MY DAUGHTER! O, my daughter!--E. J. W.


514.--_Wednesday, May 3, 1854._

AUSTRALIA: Emy: Write: T----Y.


515.--_Wednesday, May 10, 1854._

PROPONTIS, General Steam Screw Navigation Company, April 7th,
Ascension.--All serene.


516.--_Friday, May 12, 1854._

FAULKNER-STREET.--Tuesday’s received on return home; on Wednesday too
late for reply; Sunday’s not arrived; judge my feelings. A letter awaits
you as before.


517.--_Monday, May 15, 1854._

TO NEMESIS.--I will CONTINUE; all the materials exist, but the labourer
is worthy of his hire. I cannot run myself aground again, and must act
like other men.--E. J. W.


518.--_Wednesday, May 17, 1854._

TO HIDE and SEEK.--Lutte à mort. Je veux voir ma fille.--E. J. W.


519.--_Friday, May 19, 1854._

EGYPT BEATS JERUSALEM--the Gipsey Boy wins.--E. J. W.


520.--_Saturday, May 20, 1854._

MHG’S.--Khxebgn.--b’mpl sno ilz’lx zahg lplx zahgel lely ’sno mux fhxdy
vhvlxy npk lely’ sno fs uqg yqlz Mhg’s sno ahpl gu z mux
nuz’lg.--Qbe’bl.


521.--_Wednesday, May 31, 1854._

CAMB.--THANKS indeed.--Seven two, &c.


522.--_Thursday, June 1, 1854._

S lmpi F npi. C qgnl F. pil pinq. B. nlo F. nmkq nhqm hkm S. lmgh S.
lmpi F. npkl. qlgo F, oing E. mkpi. F, olhq mlih qik. ikpg nkmo ikqg C
klmh F, hkom g. qolg C. omgk W. F. mlgi ihgm C ngoi F. oimg npmh qmin
nmkq oih C omgh C lnho. F, qolg mik lign. ihlm ikpg kgpq C qknp olmp F,
mlgi C. oqli kgno. S. oqlk F, mpkh nmkq hnio.--J. de W.


523.--_Saturday, June 3, 1854._

AUSTRALIA.--Emy.--Write.--T----Y.


524.--_Tuesday, June 27, 1854._

POVERTY and HONOUR.--I’ll not touch the money. It’s stolen property.--E.
J. W.


525.--_Saturday, July 1, 1854._

S lmpi F. npi. C q gnl F. pil pink oqhi mlhg npi. E. mkpi C, klmh F,
pion qolg C. qkin F, hqon qolg B qkng F. olmh qolg C mhgq omgk qlin B
hkq F. hnpq ngmo mioq S lmpi. F, oilg qolg nlqg kgli C lnho. F, mogl. C
okiq phno S. lmpi C. omgk. F. hlnm F, mlgi C hqgi B hiq S. pkol. C q
knp olmp F, hlkp hnio B. nlo. F, oim C ngil mkqn S. lmpi C ngil F, hqon
mioq F. qopg q.go C iko F. opi C. pghq mkqn B qglp C mkqn F. onql opkn C
hgpm F, oinq E lnig F, hkom B imq C. ngoi. F. mpqn. knli. oih C hgo F,
inqg E lipg F. hnoi E mkpi F, hign ikmn.--J. de W.


526.--_Wednesday, July 5, 1854._

R. M. S. PROPONTIS. May 4, 1854, Cape of Good Hope. All serene.


527.--_Tuesday, July 11, 1854._

IS ANYTHING Wrong? For Heaven’s sake, write fully to me. I am most
anxious about you. Received your caution. Send me a long letter; there
is no danger. Your own. Near the Cows.


528.--_Wednesday, July 19, 1854._

BE HANGED if you CASH the £10 NOTES numbered 80, 319, 80, 320, 6th
April.


529.--_Friday, July 21, 1854._

GZZES, gv, tnsrxwvfno, lxwv, qbojz, fxhfjbx, xnozeo, rbxdu, so,
frtcybmf, xy, duob, sleep, taob, vjptqrsiw, jtz, sd, ejplmoff,
zugqscg.--VBBV, July 20th, 1854.


530.--_Wednesday, July 26, 1854._

CARHEE.--Your letter on Saturday cast a dreadful gloom over all. M.
would not leave that afternoon but on Sunday, and remains. Your friend
will complete what you left unfinished at the smithy. All is mystery,
and in coming events we anxiously await its explanation. The sympathy of
all is with you. Write.


531.--_Monday, July 31, 1854._

T. H. E. O.--Bit ai czyg oysr gfivi mlyster.--Uitf. a. dyzin.


532.--_Tuesday, August 1, 1854._

S. lmpi F. npi C qgnl F. pil pink B. qkng F. qolg npi. C qgnl. E. n.g.mh
C. pmlh F. oing mlgi. C lpnq F. loi C nhgq. F. hkom C klmh C. mkqn F.
oinq C. koh iko F. ompi. nmk q C pghq hgo. E l pg F. mohp oimh mpqn. C
lnho. inql. F. qmlh hgmq qoip mlih hi o C. qlik no-qk oimn F. mlgi. S
pkq-g.--J. de W.


533.--_Wednesday, August 9, 1854._

S.--As usual, gam . . . . . I received and am much disappointed at it. I
expected you would have done as I once told you to do after the
meeting--say all or . . . . Reflect well, as I will only write once
more. Be more specific, and mention the street.--K.


534.--_Monday, August 28-30-September 1-4-6-9, 1854._

IDA MAY.


535.--_Friday, September 1, 1854._

S lmpi. F npi. C. q gnl. F. pil pink. C nhgq omgk qlin B. hkq qkng F.
onkl qolg C. hgo F. npi. C qgnl. F. qik o.ghl. lgqo. F. okip olhi E mlhq
F. lmq nmi. 15th S oqlp B. qkng F. onkl. qolg C nmig B. qkm S. lmpi. C.
klmh F. npkl. mglh. qlgo. nmi. C. qkin. lhmn F. oghm qolg C lnho. F.
npi. npkl. C. mkqn. E qknm. C iko pghq ngil F. qolg mogl. C. okiq. phno.
hgo. F. kpni E. lipg C kgql. F. hmig E lnig. C. pgil qnig.--J. de W.


536.--_Thursday, September 7, 8, 9, 1854._

IDA; May. Why does not Ida write, then?


537.--_Monday, September 18-21-25-28-October 2-5-9-12, 1854._

F . . . A . . . E . . . . . erinnere dich dieses Tages und gieb endlich
Nachricht von dir. Wozu d’ esses Stillschweigen den betrübten Deinen
gegenüber?--9th October, 1848.


538.--_Wednesday, September 20, 1854._

MIGNON.--One, perhaps two. Pray take them. Mistaken all--the same.
Submission.


539.--_Thursday, September 21, 22, 23, 1854._

THIRTEEN. -- yloz -- alheza -- ahv’ bgly’ -- zusus klhxlyz -- mhg’s --
bhf -- yzbi -- yhfl -- gu -- fhxdy -- eugn -- zbfi -- xifefilx -- flyuf
lzbfly -- nuk -- Jeysuo.


540.--_Friday, September 22, 23, 1854._

NORTH KENT LINE, Sept. 20, 7.10 p.m. Up.--Dear Harriet, was it you, or
your ghost? Reply.--Blackheath-park.


541.--_September 28, 1854._

HARRIET has REPLIED to Blackheath-park for a further reply from J. H.


542.--_Friday, September 29, 1854._

HAUPTVERBINDUNGSTRASSE.


543.--_Monday, October 2, 1854._

NORTH KENT LINE, Sept. 20, 7.10. p.m. Up.--Dear Harriet, not received.
Write to the Park.


544.--_Wednesday, October 4, 1854._

SCHLAG auf SCHLAG. Schloch.


545.--_Wednesday, October 4, 1854._

KISELAK.--Ehret die Damen, sic flechten und weben, Himmlische Rosen in’s
irdische Leben.--Die drei Lerchen.


546.--_Thursday, October 5, 1854._

AUSTRALIA.--EMY, Write.--Toby.


547.--_Tuesday, October 10, 1854._

C--J--.--RECEIVED THREE--often S.--7th Oct.


548.--_Thursday, October 26, 1854._

KZDMVV.--Xzoo uli z ovggvi zg Klhg Luurxv Lculiw Hgivvg gl Beta lm gsv
27 gsrh nlmgs.


549.--_Saturday, November 4, 1854._

SERA! Carissima mia Modella! Non ho più felicita; comé vevere senza te?
Ancor vi giuro eterno fede.--Vostro Poichè.


550.--_Saturday, November 11, 1854._

WEDDING GLOVES.


551.--_Tuesday, November 14, 1854._

Q. L. B.--Gszmph--ivxvrevw hzuvob--zoo szh yvvm yfimg omt ztl rm zmhdvi
gl gsv gdl jfvhgrlmh.


552.--_Thursday, November 16, 1854._

G. P. S. P. O. A.--Tacete anima mia. Dove, dove siete? Cosi mi lasciare!
Ascolta, donna mia, respondi: carissima mia mi respondi!--Il cavaliere
del pennacchio bianco.


553.--_Thursday, November 16, 17, 1854._

TO AIBARA.--Thyt llmcu rchng dorch nyng, cntb tru? I lve btfru, wrtchdnd
illth? I amnd xpct tobe. I implr uto snd ndrcvr tomyn ghbrs I lneto
ssreme I myyt hpe. Wht spll hsmd uso frfl, rso nlke yrslf. Mynly trsrmy
lfed pnds nyr cmplnc.


554.--_Friday, November 24, 1854._

TO T. F--Ill--Out of town--Out of spirits--Out of hope.--November 17.


555.--_Tuesday, November 28, 1854._

UNREQUITED LOVE.--Be more explicit.


556.--_Thursday, November 30, 1854._

IT is NOT UNREQUITED Love.


557.--_Thursday, November 30, 1854._

FROM AIBARA.--Thyt lluwr ng. I mntch ngd, bthv mdvr yffrt tknww
hreer--urm rtmthn vr! I dhpn dhvvr yenf dncnyr cnstncy.--Tdl fmyhr
tfrnt! Lvfr mnd schd vtnms thvt ’srwrd.


558.--_Friday, December 1, 1854._

TO be KEPT TILL CALLED FOR.--Uccelletta! Uccellina! Alma mia dove sia?
La tua canta, la tua canta dolce si tace! Aima mia, anima mia respondi!
Il cavaliere del pennacchio bianco.--E. G. P. S. P. O. A.--Third
insertion.


559.--_Friday, December 1, 1854._

GRAVESEND.--Key, as advised. A journey of observation may be useful.
Keep a journal. Write every week. Do nothing without advice. Take care
of yourself, and return when you think there is no place like home. All
well.


560.--_Friday, December 1, 1854._

AIBARA.--Twwrdsp zzlm. Cntb atrck fthtb sefllw, ndnt yrwnd ngint
dysppr.--Fgnne, rstssrd I lvfrunly, ndhpe ndfthin tme sstnm nmyprsnt
wrte hdlnlnss.--Btdr stdrln gtrsr, srly “hnr” sntin vlvdin sndngm nelne
drctn yrdrlylv dhnd Fthus urpl yptne wrdn nebt yrsl fedknw.


561.--_Friday, December 1, 1854._

S lmpi F. npi C qgnl F. pil pink F. hnpq oihg kpoq ikqm kqpo hipk mq ho
olhi ikqn E. pmng F, pgnq nmi 22nd 1854, qik milp pkom omnl hipk oim
phqm omp 1855. C hgo F. hkmi ngmh E lipg C nhgq F hkom C ngqp okiq npki
lnhm inqo mgil B hig C klmh B qigk 9 F, qolg C qkin lgi 3 F, qolg B qkng
C mgil 5 F. qolg--npi ikpq lpkn npkl. S lmpi C omgk qlin B hkq F npi
npki C lmnil ngil qknp Sh. d . . . l F. nmkq phgm. D olg B qnp. C lpi
hlpm mnhg F mqln mhno E nolp F, qhon. qik qmkg C kgql ngoi lqgn F. oinq
hnik E qhno F, hmng olnk 3 oihg pil olq hnpi C nko D qmg E qmpi B qlpn C
lnho B qlpm S lmpi Dr. R. c. F. pnki kpni lqoi ighp C lqgn ngml E
mohn.--A. C.


562.--_Friday, December 8, 1854._

TO BE KEPT TILL CALLED FOR.--Great Portland-street. To A * * * E.--Sad,
sad indeed! Your bidding and my honour are sacred--rely implicitly. But
your friend who received your letters on Friday last will surely not
disregard my sorrow, my anxiety. Her attention is urgently implored.
Trust discretion.--Scordate! mai!--E. (Fourth insertion.)


563.--_Friday, December 15, 1854._

S lmpi. F. npi C qgnl. F. pil pink hipk nhpm pgnq kipo 1854. nhmp oim
kqpo. hkom impq lmnp mqho oinq qgmk omnl hipo. M. P. C omgk qlin B hkq
F. npkl. C klmh F. qolg qmlh qoin C ngoi F. oinq hnik C mkqn D. lni C
hgo E lipg F. qik Sh . . w . . ls. F. mlgi ogln C qknp F. oghm. hipo S.
mng.--A. C.


564.--_Saturday, December 16, 1854._

LA RUE de La TAMISE.--VENDRE--Vendre. Faut-il Vendre?--_Egypte._


565.--_Friday, December 29, 1854._

LA POIRE est MURE.--Egypte.


566.--_Monday, January 1, 1855._

S lmpi F, npi. C qgnl F, pil pink ikpg nqkg S. ongm F. lqoi hipo ngli
mohp ikmn lpgk milp ngmo qoin omnl 4 higo omp hmng olq mogk omnl. C hgo
F, nhkp ihlm hog npi E hpg F, nhlp qmkg hmng olq oing hoqg ikph mlih
hipo C lnho. inqo S. mhl pkqn. F, mpqn oqkh mohp qmkh S. knq F. hipk
mqho pgnm. E lhpo. lqig 29th pghq B qigk C klmh 9. F. qolg F. npi C
qgnl.--A. C.


567.--_Wednesday, January 3, 1855._

A. B. C.--I am shocked, distressed, and surprised. Address me in town,
and say what it all means; and then, if prudent, I will see you.


568.--_Tuesday, January 9, 1855._

FRANK.--“I wrote in an awful hurry; called suddenly and urgently to
L----n. Send a line there.” Impossible. No address inclosed. What J. and
M. most feared has happened; therefore the third member of the triple
alliance is summoned to the rescue on or before the 10th, to prove his
honour and sincerity were not merely words. WRITE, and address as
before.--January 4.


569.--_Monday, January 15, 1855._

S. lmpi. F. npi. C qgnl F. pil pink oimg hipk mqho. olhi. E lhpo. qik
milp ogl--oghm hipo. M. P. C omgk hkq hkp qkng nhgq F. qmkn. E lipg F.
mlih hipo C lnho. F. qmlh. lgmq S pkqg C okiq F. npi. E qlhp F. lopn
hnkl. hipo npi. E. mpnl mqno. mhqp.--A. C.


570.--_Thursday, February 1, 1855._

S lmpi F. npi C qgnl. F. pil pink C ngil F. npqm C okiq lnho F. pqm hipo
hlki. nqkg lqoi hopn npi ikpg oil. npi E lipg F. omnl hmng qik oiph hoqg
ikph ikpg 12th lqoi mnhq kghl mlih hipo C mkqn iko F. kmn hmig C ngoi F.
npi hmig.--A. C.


571.--_Tuesday, February 13, 1855._

DID 20 21, 23, 10, 19 my 26, 19, 8, 8, 19, 6? I 21, 3, 8 13, 3 9, 6, 7.
All right. I am 15, 8 8, 19, 2 16, 9, 6, 13 7, 8. Write.--W.


572.--_Saturday, February 17, 1855._

ROSA.--“Aus den Augen, Aber nicht aus dem Herz.”--Lui.


573.--_Thursday, February 22, 1855._

I WILL NOT ASSIST your INVENTION. You frequently convict yourself. Even
the question you have now asked does so. Your concluding supposition is
correct.


574.--_Friday, March 2, 1855._

YOU SEE quickly THINGS that you think you can safely say. There are many
besides that, which you dare not mention. Remain in your heartlessness
and selfishness, and with the conviction that it was never deserved.--R.


575.--_Saturday, March 3, 1855._

JE ne te vois pas, et je suis désolée.


576.--_Thursday, March 8, 1855._

JE ne te vois pas, et je suis désolé (e).


577.--_Thursday, March 8, 1855._

DO NOT be DESOLEE. I hope to have soon the pleasure of seeing you. Why
don’t you write to me? I long to hear how you are. I am very well.


578.--_Monday, March 12, 1855._

ROSA.--Dant, vicl dant, gutig madchen von der blumen. (Es ist du wuste;
nicht, als geliebt.)--L. G--S.


579.--_Thursday, March 15, 1855._

S lmpi C. qgnl F. hlin onqm hopn kgnp kgql omnl hipo mkhq lmhq lgpq nmkq
oknh lmqi E. lipg M. P. C omgk nhgq B hkq hkp C hgo F. qik ogl omnl hipk
oim hipo q.goh qmkg iklm iqhk lgon mkqp oing hlin mqkg klin qik lgnq. S
pilh F. olhi. M. npi lkng E. mpnl--F. oimg hipk mqho olhi.
B.ango--W.angée.--A. C. B.


580.--_Wednesday, April 4, 1855._

AUSTRALIA.--EMY, WRITE.--Toby.


581.--_Monday, April 9, 1855._

LA JUSTICE et sa BALANCE. Vogue la Galère. Egypte.


582.--_Monday, April 9, 1855._

I HAVE indeed coveted the possession of your letter, that I might R--d.
M. L. &c.: therefore pray send it to me, at my own address, which you
well know.--B. E. S., may I retain it until your return.


583.--_Friday, April 13-14-16-17-18-19, 1855._

EKEN BEZER.--All is yet quiet, and may be made right. Dives knows and
yields all nobly, and will do more. Give an interview at once, and you
will save yourself.


584.--_Tuesday, April 17, 1855._

J. K.--The landlord has taken all. Your wife and children are with me. I
cannot see you. Let me know everything you have done, and what you
intend doing.


585.--_Wednesday, April 18, 1855._

UNE fois pour toutes, veuillez me bien comprendre, je ne cherche pas a
violenter vos dispositions, quand vous serez disposé à parler Anglais
avec moi serai enchanté d’accéder à votre désir. Quant au cadeau dont
vous m’avez parlé, vous me feriez de la peine d’exiger que je
l’acceptasse. Le cadeau que j’estimerais le plus ce serait votre amitié;
accordez-la moi, et j’en serai heureux.


586.--_Thursday, April 19, 1855._

CHUTE.--Honneur aux Braves. Guerre aux Voleurs. Vive la Reine.--Egypte.


587.--_Monday, April 30, 1855._

HOPE ON, Hope Ever.--Never fear my being able to achieve all that we can
wish for before the expiration at which time three months is granted.
Should you be uncomfortable do not hesitate. Keep your own counsel. Do
not forget your D. nor our friend. Let me HEAR of you. Toujours la
même.--W.E.E., 30th of April, 1855.


588.--_Tuesday, May 8, 1855._

WHITE LILAC, May 8, 1853 and 1854.--Esperance, Nil Desperandum. God
bless you. The above is all left to me this year. I know not where you
are.


589.--_Monday, May 14, 1855._

ROSE of ST. BRIDE’S.--Il appartient à l’homme d’errer, et à Dieu de
pardonner.--W.alter.


590.--_Saturday, May 19-21-22, 1855._

A. Z.--The TOILET CLUB.


591.--_Tuesday, May 22, 1855._

ST. JAMES’S-STREET.--I tell you again I’ll not touch the money; it’s all
stolen property. I can get an honest living, and I prefer such.--Egypt.


592.--_Tuesday, May 29, 1855._

Y under Y 61814.--With many thanks.--C. C.


593.--_Thursday, May 31, 1855._

MANY HAPPY RETURNS of the DAY.--Send your address advertisement to the
New York Herald. News of great importance.--Mayflower.


594.--_Wednesday, June 27, 1855._

TO ST. JAMES’S-STREET.--My ideas have undergone a complete revolution on
that subject, and I tell you again I’ll not touch the money; it’s all
stolen property. But where’s my child?--EGYPT.


595.--_Tuesday, July 3, 1855._

L. E. R., 126.--P. C.


596.--_Wednesday, July 4, 1855._

PAS UN MOT.--M. G.


597.--_Wednesday, July 4, 5, 1855._

JULY the FIFTH.--La première noce. Souviens-toi de la bague de malachite
en fer-à-cheval? Ni oubliée ni pardonnée. Adesso e sempre.


598.--_Friday, July 13, 1855._

CARLETTO hat aus St. Anna lauter Eminenzen mitgebracht. Bravo,
bravissimo.


599.--_Friday, July 27, 1855._

W. P.--You were SEEN LAST NIGHT. Hawks are abroad.--25th July.


600.--_Thursday, August 9, 1855._

HOPE.--Error does not cause anger.


601.--_Tuesday, August 21, 1855._

IVY LEAF.--NO ARRANGEMENT can be MADE until I have seen you. Perform the
promise contained in your letter some time before the 30th of this
month.--Δ. 7 = 2 = 11 B = 2 = 30.


602.--_Friday, August 31, and September 3-5, 1855._

AUSTRALIA--EMY--WRITE--TOBY.


603.--_Tuesday, September 11, 1855._

TH. a NI.--No 1, 2, m’est parvenu; je suis votre opinion sur la
prudence.


604.--_Tuesday, Sept. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 1855._

RECEIVED your LETTER with great pleasure, but with great regret for the
pain you have suffered. What you desire so much would only keep alive
the subject in your mind, besides would cause grave suspicions if
discovered, and render nugatory all that has been done, which would be
lamentable indeed. The other reason you mention has no influence
whatever. Above all, to retrace your steps would be most unwise,
rendering everything still more nugatory than in the other case.
Consider the consequences and the pain which the sacrifices that have
been made (but which do not suppose regretted), having been thrown
away, would cause to others. I have gone away for five years for that
reason. The initials had better be omitted, and I therefore do so. This
will be copied by the lady you mention, and sent you as agreed upon. May
God bless you always.


605.--_Friday, September 21, 1855._

L.--An entire MYSTERY, otherwise I would.--T. M. L.


606.--_Saturday, September 22, 1855._

TH--NI.--Mittwoch hab ich No. 4, erhalten am 17t. sandte ich Ihnen
Briefe nach der leyten Direction. Ich bin bey M.P. Wenn ich wieder
schriebe zeige ich es an.


607.--_Wednesday, September 26, 1855._

TH. NI., No. 5, ist SONNABEND AUGEKOMMEN; alle sind ruhig, und mit Ihnen
einverstanden für die zeit. Kein Wort ist wahr von der Reise-Ruhe.
Arduld und zeit allin wird Sugen bringen. Die Verleumder werden zur zeit
die Stease finden.


608.--_Saturday, September 29, 1855._

PITY.--Yes.--The future of a buried heart and conscience! It is more
than unfeeling to seize the unhappy hour of a weak and erring heart to
influence it, to violate its whole nature, abandon the tenderest ties,
and make it for ever bankrupt of every true and proper feeling. Remorse,
and one day you will feel it.


609.--_Monday, October 1, 1855._

TH. NI.--Das Awiso B wird für Moutag benützt werden durch die
versprochene bortsetzung des dennerstagiegen Briefs. B ald werden jene
Wolken verschenchen die Jhren Himmel trüben--bliecken Sie mit zuversicht
auf eine nahe Befreiung.


610.--_Thursday, October 4, 1855._

TO MY FRIEND.--L. 7¾ inches; C. 6½ inches.


611.--_Thursday, October 4, 1855._

THIS is a funny world, and people seem to have entertained funny
ideas.--The BROOCH was found to be of inferior description, and not
likely to have been worn by either. The letter shall be called for if
desired, but think better not.


612.--_Friday, October 5, 1855._

RECEIVED.--“It did relate to you.”--“It has reached the hands it was
meant for.”--Your conjecture is right about the cause. I will explain;
but in the meantime, WRITE to me in full confidence immediately you see
this. I am very sad, and anxious to hear you know of who and what about.
Address now M., Post-office, Camberwell-green.


613.--_Saturday, October 6, 1855._

J. B. R.--The MONKEY is HOME. Where is the Man of Ross.--G. G.


614.--_Saturday, October 6, 1855._

TH. NI.--No. 9, ist seit Dienstag in meiner Hand. Tausend Dank dafür.
Mit allem einverstanden werden sie am 8t. die Autwort erhalten. Es mucht
mich glucklich zu wissen das sie alle wohl sind. Nicht verzagen nur
muthig hoffen.


615.--_Monday, October 8, 1855._

TH. NI.--In meiner gestrigen Anzeige sagte ich, am 8t. werden Sie
Antwort erhalten, hegen Sie Keine Besorgnisse wenn dies erst am 10tm.
sein wird. Ich beschäftige mich nur mit Ihnen, und Allem was Ihnen lieb
ist.


616.--_Tuesday, October 9, 1855._

THE HALL.--RHOSLLANERCHRYGOG. U bi “This is the first time of asking.”


617.--_Saturday, October 13, 1855._

THE HALL.--RHOSLLANERCHRY GOG. Ubi? “This is the second time of asking.”


618.--_Saturday, October 13, 1855._

THE PRUSSIAN ALLIANCE.--Will any one inform the writer why we should be
more angry with Prussia for not joining us in the war than with Sweden,
Denmark, Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, and Spain? And why we may not
have a family alliance with a despotic Power as well as a political
one?--B. B., post-office, Chancery-lane.


619.--_Monday, October 15, 1855._

YES.--IMMOVABLE.


620.--_Monday, October 15, 1855._

BELL’ FIORE degli CARACCAS! Sera dell’pittore divino! Modella mia! sopra
questo giorno felice ancor vi giuro eterna fede.--Vostro Poichè.


621.--_Thursday, October 18, 1855._

VERITAS.


622.--_Thursday, October 18, 1855._

BRIGHTON.--“I shall be ---- months,” July 15. The proposal will be
renewed when you return; its success depends upon your assisting me
openly. Do write and tell me everything. I cannot.--August 12, September
21 and 26.


623.--_Friday, October 19, 1855._

M. T.--RECEIVED BOTH. You are very naughty. Pray do not encourage him.
If you knew that your letters were safe would you write? My movements
are uncertain just now.


624.--_Friday, October 19, 1855._

TH. NI.--Ich gehe erst heute Donnerstag nach B. um jides
Missverstandniss vorzubengen sagen sie mir B. post-office, ob ich schon
Mittwoch in B. einen Brif hätte haben sollen. L. Brief hat Al. erhalten.


625.--_Saturday, October 20, 1855._

K. C. B.---- V----Y. X.


626.--_Monday, October 22, 1855._

TH. Ni. Samstag. Haben Sie heute von mir Brief erhalten? Wenn ich diesz
von Ihnen erfahren habe, nur dann Kann ich Ihnen wieder schreiben, ich
habe vielleicht unrecht meiner Gouwernante zu miesztrauen, aber die
Vorsicht gebiethet mir unsere Besprechung bis einer Nachricht von Ihnen
zu unterlassen. Briefe nach London. W.--Ihre Mutter befindet sich
besser.


627.--_Tuesday, October 23, 1855._

K.--Spare the undeserving. Transgressors there have been, ’tis true, but
none so great I think as you.--A. Z.


628.--_Thursday, October 25, 1855._

JUDGE NOT that you be not judged. I am weak, probably you are strong. “I
would not offend.”


629.--_Thursday, October 25, 1855._

HAYDEE.--Londres. J’ai reçu la visite No. 11, avec ses compagnons.
Therese est très tranquille; elle approuve de son ami. Oui, je vous
verrai comme vous m’indiquer; je dirai le jour; espère toujours,
j’approuve tout; les ennuis cesseront, le tourment de Brighton est
depuis deux mois à Paris ou l’ami F. la console; de Barcelone pas des
nouvelles.


630.--_Thursday, November 1, 1855._

HOPE.--By that pure love I have struggled to preserve, with every effort
of my soul; by that bitter cup you have given, and I drank to the
dregs--by those ties no man can sever--by promises made to those now no
more--I will see you. Be true to yourself and to me. Oh! M--y! M--y! I
would save you the pangs of error--God forbid of crime--and though the
passion, jealousy, hate and madness you have excited--be scorned and
denied--when the serpent you foster is wearied--yea, even then--here is
your haven, when all forsake.

God protect you.--D----.


631.--_Thursday, November 1, 1855._

HAYDEE.--Ce Lundi que j’ai reçu la visite de No. 3, elle était bien
aimable, bien bonne, et m’a rendue tout contente. Par la même adresse
vous pouvez me dire si mon ouvrage vous plait, je voudrais pour rien au
monde travailler pour le Roi de Prusse.


632.--_Friday, November 2, 1855._

ST. PAUL’S-CROSS.--One thing you seem to have forgotten.


633.--_Friday, November 2, 1855._

THE gay flowers of summer we can but admire, but the wild flowers of
spring will I place near my heart.


634.--_Saturday, November 3, 1855._

H. E. T. C. S.--Philip Augustus. “The oasis in the desert.”


635.--_Thursday, November 8, 1855._

D.--It must not be privately settled. You are deceived. Those now no
more were deceived. I foster none: but am true to ties of happier days.
Open to me a communication and a public investigation.--MARY.


636.--_Saturday, November 10, 1855._

STRANGER.--You were present, I was absent. I am present, you are
absent. Suspense I cannot bear. Tell me, am I never to see you
again?--W . . . . . r, November 7.


637.--_Wednesday, November 14, 1855._

YOU must be much more explicit for me to understand you. I fear a
mistake in the identity. Give me some definition.--STRANGER.


638.--_Wednesday, November 14, 1855._

PUSSA, Hornsey.--Three sent with the initials--two to first post-office
mentioned; the other to post-office, Knightsbridge. The same as ever,
more so if possible. Gravels so nice; expected the weddings. April 29
and 30. P. S. Last just received. Yes, for ever----.


639.--_Thursday, November 15, 1855._

TO STRANGER (W. R.).--Met at the Adelphi, October 11; present also at
Trinity Church, October 16.--M. D., 27, Jewin crescent.


640.--_Wednesday, November 21, 1855._

HEMINGTONE CHAUCER, C. E. Journal, 53, p. 32-128. ---- G. Z.


641.--_Monday, November 26, 1855._

A. L . . . K.--Où puis j’adresser, afin que je puisse vous envoyer les
cendres? COMMUNIQUEZ, comme autrefois, avec TOUT A VOUS--X. Y.
Z.--November 23, 1855.


642.--_Wednesday, November 28, 1855._

THE ADMIRAL, Sir.--X. K. Y. Z.  S. N.  O. G.


643.--_Friday, November 30, 1855._

OLD ADMIRAL, E. G. C. S., 44, is in GREAT TROUBLE.--November 29, 1855.


644.--_Saturday, December 1, 1855._

THE ADMIRAL.--X. K. Y. Z. Mark, alas! I blame myself. Figaro has
destroyed Prestos. Snooks’s “Old Clo,” hard up.


645.--_Tuesday, December 4, 1855._

A. B. C. D.--J’ai répondu à votre dernière lettre le 19e Novembre, en
adressant 15, C.C., et n’ai rien entendu depuis. Il me semble qu’une
lettre perdue ou un accident peuvent seul être cause de votre silence,
et je suis très inquiète. Adressez, comme avant, E. S. R., etc.


646.--_Wednesday, December 5, 1855._

TO TOOOPSI.--L’orage ne doit pas briser la fleur; son gardien vit de son
parfum et veille sur elle. Qu’elle ne se fâne pas pour lui--c’est sa
prière journalière. Le bouton de rose voudrait bien être cueilli, mais
qu’il se garde et ne s’épanouie que pour celui qui ne respire que par sa
rosée.


647.--_Thursday, December 6, 1855._

THE ADMIRAL.--Not yet. Poor me! Sorry for Mark, glad as to the others.
Anything pressing, say, and nw in a twinkle.


648.--_Thursday, December 6, 1855._

A. B. C. D.--J’ai répondu à votre dernière lettre le 19 Novembre, en
adressant 15, C . . . C . . . . et n’ai rien entendu depuis. Il me
semble qu’une lettre perdue ou un accident peuvent seul être cause de
votre silence, et je suis très inquiète. Adressez comme avant, E. S. R.,
Post-office, Brompton-road.


649.--_Friday, December 7, 1855._

THE ADMIRAL.--X. K. Y. Z. L. N. O. G. Presto!


650.--_Tuesday, December 11, 1855._

INNUMERABLE KIND WISHES; ever true. Unalterable, unalterable.


651.--_Friday, December 14, 1855._

JENNY LIND’S NIGHTS.--Ladies and Gentlemen, TAKE CARE of your PROPERTY.
A sufferer from the Swell Mob warns you!


652.--_Wednesday, December 19, 1855._

BOHEMIAN, where is thy work? For thee, all is delayed! Thou, who art
called Target, WRITE at once to Newington-butts, and pacify the
anxieties of Hookey and his clan.--December 18, 1855.


653.--_Monday, December 24, 1855._

OLD ADMIRAL.--E. G., C. S., 44, is in great TROUBLE. December 22, 1855.


654.--_Monday, December 24, 1855._

UNALTERABLE.--KIND WISHES. I have much to communicate. I don’t even know
where the one referred is now residing. Left.


655.--_Tuesday, December 25, 1855._

UNALTERABLE.--KIND WISHES has been RECEIVED. The once referred is still
here, and will be glad to hear a favourable report.--H., December 24,
1855.


656.--_Wednesday, December 26, 1855._

THE ADMIRAL.--Xkyz. Alas! Je vous souhaite une heureuse nouvelle année.

Requiescat in pace.


657.--_Thursday, December 27, 1855._

SPOONINI is anxious to HEAR of DAISY’S WHEREABOUTS. The charades pause
for a reply.


658.--_Monday, December 31, 1855._

THE ADMIRAL.--Dieu Le benisse! Alas! tu dis? Je suis très inquiet; mille
fois je réciproque les bons souhaits. Tu es mon rêve de la nuit, ma
vision du matin. Requiescat in pace? Ah, que c’était Snooks.


659.--_Tuesday, January 1, 1856._

CE 1er JANVIER.--On vous renvoi à aujourd’hui un an le tout de même,
hormis le refrain--dont on reconnaît la stupidité!


660.--_Tuesday, January 1, 1856._

SOMMES-NOUS toujours en rapport? Votre silence, nécessité ou volontiers?
Depuis la réception des deux numéros, point des nouvelles.--Dec. 31,
1855.


661.--_Tuesday, January 1, 1856._

ALL RIGHT, to the 13th of October. C. is to be found at E., and
protection. Murray will do, and possesses. Nos. 1 and 3 doubtful. Still
depend confidently on the option William gave you; he will persevere
through all. He wishes to hear from you much. Your brother is pretty
well; his hope strong, and resolution unfaltering.


662.--_Tuesday, January 1, 1856._

M. D. is most affectionately thanked for kind wishes and kinder advice;
but how sad and difficult a task will it prove to follow the latter. A
selfish and weak heart has to be controlled, and its very idol to be
given up. I will, however, strive as you desire, for I feel that I ought
to do thus much at least for a newly found and very dearly beloved
relative.


663.--_Wednesday, January 2, 1856._

DAISY feels inexpressibly flattered by Spoonini’s tender inquiries, but
having found a more perfect hero in a new company, she begs gratefully
to decline any renewal of the old engagement.


664.--_Friday, January 4, 1856._

C. B.--ALL WRONG, and very ill.


665.--_Friday, January 4, 1856._

THE ADMIRAL.--Merci. C’est le couleur de rose. Je suis
malheureuse.--Presto.


666.--_Saturday, January 5, 1856._

COULEUR BRUNE et BLEU.--J’ai RECUE tous vos LETTRES. Mille remerciments.
Vous trouverez mes nouvelles, comme vous m’indiquez, le Lundi ou Mardi
prochain. Mon bonheur dépend de votre tranquillité, de votre santé;
soignez-vous, donc, pour celui qui est à vous pour la vie.


667.--_Monday, January 7, 1856._

REACH.--YES. Address, as usual, W. H. C., 1, Long-lane. I mean the
metaphors.


668.--_Tuesday, January 8, 1856._

THE ADMIRAL.--Presto.--Je ne veux pas que vous y aller à la Porte St.
Martin. Vous la trouverez où je reçois la mienne. Demandez du Domino
Noir, ou de la Blonde. J’ai tout commandé.


669.--_Wednesday, January 9, 1856._

THE ADMIRAL.--Do not send Presto to the Dominoes; it will not answer.
Send to Porte St. Martin, to the name you first told me. Alas!


670.--_Friday, January 11, 1856._

THE ADMIRAL.--J’ai oublié tout-à-fait de l’envoyer. C’est absolument ma
faute. On est fâché. W. W. Lundi--A la Porte St. Martin. J’attendrai la
votre.


671.--_Saturday, January 12, 1856._

POETICUS.--Where are you now? 4, 126, 200, 272, 5, 96. Yours have not
been received. Be just. TRUTH.


672.--_Tuesday, January 15, 1856._

FRANGIPANI.--Do not doubt me. Numbers 67, 412, 87. You will now
comprehend the delay.


673.--_Tuesday, January 15, 1856._

H. B. M.--He that conquers a fault is even more worthy than if he had
never erred. With truth and honour for your weapons--hope still.--ROYAL
NAVY.


674.--_Tuesday, January 15, 1856._

THE ADMIRAL.--I have called twice. Presto was not at home. I cannot
account for it. One awaits you at Porte St. Martin. Do not keep me
longer in suspense. Alas! alas!


675.--_Wednesday, January 23, 1856._

LA COULEUR BRUNE et BLEU va RECEVOIR vos NOUVELLES; ils sont arriver
hier, jour de mon absence de Londres. Je vous faire prévenir de ma
réponse: je n’ai jamais d’autre souci.--19 Janvier.


676.--_Wednesday, January 23, 1856._

TOUJOURS en RAPPORT trouvera la musique à la même adresse qu’autre fois.
Pas de nouvelles de Mama. Dois-je vendre les actions, et gardez jusqu’à
quand la somme?--21 Janvier.


677.--_Friday, February 1, 1856._

BELFAST.--TRUTH.--He has, I expect, to receive a letter from her the
early part of next week. Yours of the 19th came safe to hand. I was not
so well pleased with the last entertainment.--B.


678.--_Saturday, February 2, 1856._

“Γνωθει Σεαυτογ.”

C.--If the advertiser is correct in assuming “C” to be the initial of
the “author” of the poem sent to N., he would be glad to hear further
from him, as he very much admires his style of satire, but can hardly
approve of its biting causticity.


679.--_Tuesday, February 5, 1856._

N.----NO. Quite out of place.--T. S.


680.--_Friday, February 8, 1856._

A. H.--I am indeed pained and shocked, and can hardly believe it
possible. WRITE all particulars to your broken-hearted father; also what
has become of him, and who are cognizant of it.


681.--_Monday, February 18, 1856._

DE L’EAU CHAUDE.--39.


682.--_Tuesday, February 19, 1856._

CU. Y. TZ.--Votre associe est très inquiet; vos affaires s’arrangeront,
mais vous ne devez pas vous absenter. Revenez ou écrire, à votre ami,
compatriote de M. L.


683.--_Thursday, February 21, 1856._

LAVENDER.


684.--_Thursday, February 21, 1856._

HEALTH and HAPPINESS.--Guests numerous. Presents 40. Friends and
pensioners received mementoes.--_Excelsior._


685.--_Thursday, February 28, 1856._

LAVENDER.--Cannot answer Anonymous Letters.


686.--_Saturday, March 1, 1856._

DE L’EAU CHAUDE. Happy Returns.--39.


687.--_Saturday, March 1, 1856._

Z.--I return the question to G. C. Street, as before. The three
relieving rounds received safely. Many thanks. Remember.


688.--_Friday, March 14, 1856._

ISABELL IS IN THE SAME Lodgings.


689.--_Tuesday, April 1, 1856._

HAMPSTEAD HEATH ENCLOSURE.--Look out! The Weasel is not asleep!


690.--_Wednesday, April 2, 1856._

TO M. R. B.--H.


691.--_Thursday, April 3, 1856._

HAMPSTEAD HEATH ENCLOSURE.--I am glad to hear Weasel is not asleep, as
traps are laid for him.


692.--_Saturday, April 5, 15, 19, 1856._

THAT promised on the 7th and dated 10th January reached your brother
only on the 17th March. His suspense was great, but faith steadfast. All
are safe to the 10th January. By the time you see this there will be
something awaiting you as before. Now safer than ever. Be vigilant, and
look well within, for the meshes are weaving around you.--Sibella.


693.--_Wednesday, April 9, 1856._

EDWARD.--I am nearly mad. Suspense is death to me. My inquiries have
only increased my sufferings. For God’s sake let me know the worst. Two
wretched dreams have caused desolation that scarcely death could
realize. Do WRITE.--St. Pancras.


694.--_Saturday, April 12, 1856._

L’INDISPOSITION de la “Séra du poête divin” est la seule chose au monde
qui puisse me causer du vrai chagrin. Rassurez moi.--Votre puisque.


695.--_Thursday, May 1, 1856._

AUSTRALIA.--EMY. WRITE.--TOBY.


696.--_Wednesday, May 7, 1856._

SUSAN (not lovely dear).--£100, not more. Quick work.


697.--_Tuesday, May 13, 1856._

DRIVE it from you as you would a pestilence. WRITE immediately, or apply
at Mr. W. P.’s.


698.--_Wednesday, May 14, 1856._

TO AMY.--7 first and last. Success is not to be desired, or sought for.
E. . . . . . . r, the watchword through life.


699.--_Thursday, May 29, 1856._

M. D.--I will arrange as well as I can, and with great pleasure. In such
a limited space I cannot describe all I feel, but I do feel deeply all I
have read.


700.--_Friday, May 30, 1856._

TO E.--Ten Thousand THANKS.--Three magnificent ones have come to
hand.--Your “Old Man.”


701.--_Tuesday, June 3, 4, 5, 1856._

TREU, fast, und verschwiegen. Haben sie mein so gar vergessen? Werde ich
sie am sechsten abends sehen, wenn ich gehe? Wenn nicht, darf ich
schreiben?


702.--_Wednesday, June 4, 1856._

BELLE MODELE, SERA, de 1854.--Je ne cherche que l’occasion de vous
assurer que vous m’êtes plus chère que jamais. Si vous m’aimez, soignez
cette précieuse santé. Notre séparation, les distractions du monde, ne
font qu’augmenter mon attachement. Ecrivez dix mots de confiance.--12
Septembre--VOTRE PUISQUE.


703.--_Tuesday, June 10, 1856._

TREU, Fast, Verschwiegen.--Ich kann niemals vergessen. Das Schreiben
wird aus Licht die Vergungen heiten aus ihrer Ruhe hervor zu klar zu
helle bringen; aber wenn Sie es wünschen, so schreiben Sie, und Ich
werde Ihnen auf Ihren Brief antworten.


704.--_Thursday, June 12, 1856._

UNALTERABLE, also, if you are my *. If you are, pray give me my own
sign. You cannot mistake it. Then I shall not offend if I write. This
very day let me have it.


705.--_Thursday, June 12, 1856._

FRIDAY, May 30.--I have the most beautiful horse in England, but not the
most beautiful lady. Your silence pains me deeply. I cannot forget
you.--M.


706.--_Friday, June 13, 1856._

UNALTERABLE.--Watch with O O O. Do WRITE immediately, as before. Not
received, but mistake discovered, and deeply regretted.--Z.


707.--_Saturday, June 14, 1856._

TO A. B. C.--Have noticed the “Impression,” cherish the deepest
gratitude, think (not certain) I know the good Samaritans. Pray be on
the look out, above all look “upwards.” Remember what is at stake.--A.
M. C.


708.--_Monday, June 16, 1856._

CHEF d’ŒUVRE du PEINTRE DIVIN.--La lettre que vous m’avez conjuré de
détruire, sur laquelle j’avais inscrit ces mots, “Non e per me più
felità,” c’est brulée. Celà m’a beaucoup coûté, puisqu’elle nous liait
mystérieusement ensemble, mais je vous obéis. Ma vie m’est sans
intérêt. Mon attachement augmente. Avez vous observé l’annonce
antécédente?--PUISQUE.


709.--_Saturday, June 21, 1856._

HAMPSTEAD-HEATH ENCLOSURE.--Wake up, and PETITION PARLIAMENT.


710.--_Saturday, June 21, 1856._

PUISQUE.--I wish to be assured my letter is destroyed. ADDRESS me by my
initials, Yes or No, certainly.


711.--_Saturday, June 21-25-28, 1856._

NOTHING of later date than 21st March received, consequently much
anxiety. Your brother is returned. For you three, since that sent you on
the 7th April.--Sibella. June 18.


712.--_Tuesday, June 24, 1856._

A. to B.--1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, YES. 6, 13, 14, 16,
17, No.--June 21, 1856.


713.--_Tuesday, June 24, 1856._

SOIR de CLAUDE LORRAINE.--Je suis convaincu qu’une annonce portant mon
nom adopté, et avec référence à un sujet qui nous régardait, ne
provenait pas de vous. Je l’attribue, donc, ou à quelque désir de me
tendre une piége, ou à une coincidence incroyable, et presqu’
impossible.--Sempré il stesso.


714.--_Tuesday, June 24, 1856._

MANCHESTER.--Only just before your letter reached my hotel in London I
obtained fresh light from the public documents upon the great question
in which we are both engaged. Prices do not fluctuate much (especially
cotton), because the annexation question (which chiefly affects us),
though complicated (look at Marcy’s note), may probably be finished, if
a proper mediator can be found. And why not? Answer this. It is
understood on both sides that the independence of the Parent State is to
be maintained; and, if necessary, vindicated, notwithstanding internal
cabal and unwarranted external intrigue and interference, which latter
is, after all, the chief cause of the misunderstanding between the
Powers. Your ’cuteness, I see, distances pretty considerably my
slowness, distracted as I am with the States’ affairs; but Weasel is not
caught twice in the same trap. Address as before.


715.--_Tuesday, June 24, 1856._

PUISQUE.--A reply so headed in this morning’s paper is not mine. I have
not replied at all until now, and shall not do so again in this manner.
Some mistake, or curiosity, or worse perhaps. WRITE to me, name in full,
post-office, giving an address: I will reply, giving you one, then there
can be no more mistakes. Do this at once. Grief and anxiety are rapidly
doing their work. My idol is indeed a rare combination of tenderness,
talent, and every virtue. Love and admiration still contend, represented
now by two sweet cherubs.--Ever YOUR OWN; June 21, 1856.


716.--_Saturday, June 28, 1856._

TOM came ashore yesterday, in the bark Hope, and wrote directly. He is a
shy, odd fellow, rather slow, but thoroughly honest, very like Parson
Adams.--June 27, 1856.


717.--_Thursday, July 3, 1856._

TOM put out last week in a storm, but, as the glass is rising, hopes to
find his way home soon, though he is alone in his slow boat, without a
pilot.--July 2, 1856.


718.--_Thursday, July 3, 1856._

FEUILLE de HETRE.--Je suis désolé d’apprendre, que vous avez été
souffrante, et je suis en proie à des anxiétés cruelles puisque vous
avez tant à entreprendre. Vous perdre serait mon coup de mort. Que le
Ciel vous protège. Ces lignes n’étaient que trop dévorés. Le tableau ne
vous est plus rival.--Il triste é povero asilo.


719.--_Monday, July 7, 1856._

NICHT EINE MILLION.


720.--_Tuesday, July 8, 1856._

KEINE MILLION, gar nichts, ist erwartet.


721.--_Wednesday, July 9, 1856._

MONEYMARSH.--SINGLE.


722.--_Thursday, July 10, 1856._

GENUG FUR ALLES.


723.--_Monday, July 14, 1856._

GWENLLIAN.--Tuesday or Wednesday.


724.--_Monday, July 14, 1856._

YOU promised to let me know your wishes and views of the matter in full.
You have not done so. I feel that I am unkindly treated. You think it
right to keep me always in the dark, and consider one unworthy your
confidence. London, 12th.


725.--_Monday, July 14, 1856._

MANCHESTER.--E.--Recent public documents have supplied me with the most
satisfactory intelligence upon the annexation question. Dallas is to fix
everything. But you must know that before I write again direct, I have
to satisfy myself as to the views of the parent state, which I conclude
to be all along pacific, though I am not cute in negotiation, having
been so long a squatter on the sunny banks of the far west. I am
particularly gratified to find that you cordially agree with me upon
this question.--Crampton has reached this.--V. M. F.--July 12.


726.--_Saturday, July 19, 1856._

MY COLOURS are NAILED, not tied to the MASTHEAD.--T.


727.--_Tuesday, July 22, 1856._

X. Y. Z.--In answer to yours of the 9th inst., Tom writes that his
sisters misunderstand him--they living in society, he in retirement,
never giving, and therefore too slowly taking a hint. How can he help
feeling towards them sincere brotherly love, when he is so fully aware
of their many valuable qualities, including an affectionate disposition,
good sense, superior education, and accomplishments? I tell him to try
and join them in a holiday trip before the winter.--Y. A. F.


728.--_Tuesday, July 22, 1856._

GROSSE FREUDE!--Aber warum hast du zweifel gehabt?--T.


729.--_Wednesday, July 23, 1856._

HEUTE in GEFANGNISS; morgen frei.--July 22.


730.--_Thursday, July 24, 1856._

MANCHESTER, E.--The discordance of my private despatches with the public
documents suddenly and most unexpectedly arrests my progress. In
retiring to the old Prairie settlement, I grieve to find myself obliged
to record what you, I know, fully believe, the entire sincerity and
disinterestedness of my long and anxious endeavours to arrange this
question.--YOURS.--July 23, 1856.


731.--_Friday, July 25, 1856._

FAIRS.--Middlesex to wit.--These annual gatherings cannot be postponed,
for a good deal of business is done by help of the gilt gingerbread,
toys, and pan-pipes. The scaffolding for the shows at the last two broke
down about three weeks ago, and could not be mended in time.


732.--_Saturday, July 26, 1856._

MISTIFIED, not Gratified, but Pacified. My colours have been rather
roughly torn away; but I am trying to steady myself by keeping a sharp
look out upon the windmills, and nailing an old head of Don Quixote at
the prow.--Tom.


733.--_Monday, July 28, 1856._

MANCHESTER, E.--My favourite clipper does not sail yet; so it is just
possible that I may get some private news, which, you must see, is quite
indispensable to support the public documents.--YOURS.--July 26, 1856.


734.--_Thursday, July 31, 1856._

IMMER der Deinige, aber der zweifel erscheint in der Ferne.


735.--_Thursday, July 31, 1856._

FEUILLE de HETRE to ----.--Your friend B. will soon call upon you, as of
old. He will not allude to the subject, and pray be careful that you do
not. Tell me if you understand. Why may I not write?


736.--_Thursday, July 31, 1856._

MANCHESTER, E.--I am still without any private news to support the
public documents. You know that I cannot act upon these. The Britishers
withhold all confidence from the straightforward, singlestick settler.
However, I shall not cross the water yet, being determined to spare no
reasonable efforts to settle successfully the question which has so long
and anxiously occupied my attention.--Yours, July 30, 1856.


737.--_Friday, August 1, 1856._

A VOW.--1855, December 5th.--J. N09014.


738.--_Friday, August 1, 1856._

DER ZWEIFEL VERSCHWINDET.


739.--_Friday, August 1, 1856._

Z. Y. X., E.--The news you sent me from the opposite shore is most
gratifying and important. You must allow for my imperfect instructions
in the foreign tongue; but I believe I understand your intentions now,
and, of course, I shall follow them exactly. I wish I knew our mutual
friend’s hotel, for I feel that I ought to anticipate his visit. What
can your last inquiry mean?--Yours ever. T.


740.--_Saturday, August 2, 1856._

A VOW.--Dec. 5, 1855.--J. N09014.


741.--_Saturday, August 2, 1856._

EMILIE, on the 22nd, sent No. 3, to Rmgviozx; on the 28th, No. 4 to the
city, directed to our friend there. Have they your address? Give me full
directions. Why not poste-restante as before?--July 30.


742.--_Saturday, August 9, 1856._

FEUILLE de HETRE to ----.--I read your advertisement on the 3rd of July,
headed as above; since that I have seen nothing from you, nor have I
advertised until the 31st, headed also as above, to which you have not
replied. I intend writing to you to the old address, unless you tell me
to the contrary. There must be an explanation, or you may mistake
ignorance for friendliness. At present you little dream who has been
your Highland friend. Reply to this, or say if you understand that of
the 31st.--Ever your own.


743.--_Monday, August 11, 1856._

MY colours, though torn, are still at the masthead. They would be very
flimsy if they could not stand a stiff breeze.--TOM.


744.--_Tuesday, August 12, 1856._

CHANGE and BENEFIT.--EXCELSIOR.


745.--_Tuesday, August 19, 20, 25, 28, 1856._

STILL nothing of later date than the 21st of March. The three awaiting
you as before (this announced in June last; so long neglected) must be
withdrawn at the end of this month. Reflect on the 28th of August. I
must know your present wishes, as a crisis is at hand; and, if other
means now in operation fail to effect it, your brother will seek
you.--SIBELLA.


746.--_Wednesday, August 20, 1856._

VANCLUSE.--The unintelligible (July 1) was reasonable; now solved
License. Selten und unsterblich ist du wahre Liebe.--Yours.


747.--_Wednesday, August 20, 1856._

AT sea, becalmed; in a chilly fog; confused sounds of distant guns,
betokening a sudden engagement with an enemy. My tattered colours still
flying at the masthead. Send me a pilot, that I may clear the shoals and
grapple with the foe.--Yours, TOM.


748.--_Wednesday, August 27, 1856._

MY DEAR BROTHER.--Your sisters, C. and M., have no words to express
their gratitude. They only ask one line more, to show that it is not a
delusion. Thank Tom for his invaluable log of the “Cor Caroli.” If I
slip my lodgings, it will be to avoid the pressing kindness of my
relations, who wish me to go to Hanwell. To you I shall be at 42. This
difficulty explains my long delay.


749.--_Thursday, August 28, 1856._

SAFE through life’s dangers till near their end: then, a fall, a
betrayal too cruel, a life wound. One who could not spare is implored to
pity and forgive.--August 25, 1856.


750.--_Wednesday, September 3, 1856._

T. R. C.--I am now more than ever convinced there must be some mistake
or strange coincidence, and in vain I try to solve this distressing
mystery by advertising. This is my last attempt, and if still
unsuccessful, shall avail myself of the only means I possess of
communicating with you. I can endure this state of misery and suspense
no longer. My promise must be forgotten. Circumstances alter cases. That
of the 28th has given me a severe shock, and I grieve that you should
not have spared me this by writing as I asked, and enabling me to do so.
By the time you see this, a second letter will be waiting at the
post-office, Brighton, addressed to you--name in full, &c., just as
usual. Lose no time in getting your letters and replying.--Ever your
own.--August 30, 1856.


751.--_Friday, September 5, 1856._

T. R. C.--The signature to mine, dated August 28, was a mistake, and
must have puzzled you greatly. I am, contrary to my intention,
advertising again, as a new light has broken in upon me. Tell me where
to write, for I must now communicate with you. I think you have acted
very strangely throughout, and unintelligibly. Failing a new address, I
shall use the only one I am sure about. The time has arrived.
Displeased.--Ever your own, E * *.--September 2, 1856. A third letter
awaits you.


752.--_Wednesday, September 10, 1856._

JUNE the 8th.--Glorious associations. Mark Tapley in Eden never more
jovial. Despatches may be sent to the Strand, en route for Claudet.
All’s well.


753.--_Saturday, September 13, 1856._

THIRTEENTH.--Mhggs--Nuk--iclyy--suo
suox--Gu--fhxd--guq--zbfl--jhguz--clyug--bmijzbug--qbes.


754.--_Thursday, September 18, 1856._

MANCHESTER.--Since my last, a few weeks since, the general central
question has been well nigh settled. Ruatan is, I reckon, to be ceded by
the Britishers. But none of the public documents on the left-central
question can be depended on; and as there’s no applying just now to the
Britishers’ Cabinet (the Court and all vacating), I fear nothing can be
fixed right away. Facts on both sides of the water have, it seems,
unluckily complicated and delayed quite beyond my comprehension the
settlement of this question, and frustrated my own exertions. I guess
you know how all this disturbs the simple notions of the quiet Prairie
settler. Nevertheless, before I order my clipper, and sail away into
distant waters, I mean to indulge my pertinacity of negotiation by
waiting some space for the fixing by the Cabinet here, however this may
eventuate. Guard the settlement, for I hear Kansas has risen. September
17, 1856.


755.--_Friday, September 26, 1856._

TO A. GARDIENNE.--Depuis Lundi déjà les nouvelles de Madrid sont très
bonnes--soyez tranquille. O’Donnell n’est plus qu’un cadavre; son nom
seul appartient à l’histoire.


756.--_Monday, September 29, 1856._

A. GARDIENNE.--J’oublié hier de vous dire que le Général est avec son
aide-de-camp. Vos dépêches de Samedi passé ont été reçus, et nous vous
remercions de cœur. Etes-vous tranquille? Que pourrions nous faire pour
vous? Notre esprit se préoccupe de cette seule pensée.


757.--_Thursday, October 2, 1856._

EMILIE can INQUIRE, September 30.


758.--_Thursday, October 2, 1856._

J. S.--Un piége; en vain. Croyez, confiez vous.--Belette.


759.--_Wednesday, October 8, 1856._

FROM EMMELIE.--N L M W Z B. I can inquire. All is well.--October 3.


760.--_Thursday, October 9, 1856._

TO EMMELIE.--No 3 has arrived. Many thanks. Saturday it will reach its
destination. Your little sister is quite well. Your news reaches always
in safety. You need be in no anxiety about C. A.--October 8, 1856.


761.--_Thursday, October 9, 1856._

CALEB WILLIAMS.--1. Every other consideration will be held subsidiary to
the fact of the documents clearing up what has been placed under doubt.
2. The plagiarisms of the lost manuscripts are of little consequence,
except as they may be made to countenance a personation, or aid the
wire-pulling of the S. M. confederacy. Mr. Thomas Piers Healey may be
seen each day this week, from 9 o’clock to noon, at 27, Tottenham-place,
Tottenham-court-road.


762.--_Thursday, October 16, 1856._

CALEB WILLIAMS.--When authority is Faganized here and Sadlierized there,
till Government is becoming but a section of the “Jolly Beggars’ Clubs”
British and foreign, what can happen but that the Crimea of society must
follow that of War, and the Triumrogueate end in the reign of
Bogus-tus?--T. P. H.


763.--_Friday, October 17, 1856._

MR. ARCHIBALD TRAIL (2 C.)--Mr. Corfield.


764.--_Saturday, October 18, 1856._

T.--Le nouveau conseil de Ministres est déjà formé sous Narvaez. Les
nouvelles d’aujourd’hui sont plus favorables. L’incertitude seulement,
l’ombrage point de tout, cause le delai sur la marche des forces il y a
longtemps rassemblées.--B.


765.--_Saturday, October 18, 1856._

EMMILIE.--C. A. has RECEIVED No. 4, which will reach its destination on
Sunday next. Your little sister is enjoying excellent health.


766.--_Thursday, October 23, 1856._

A. GARDIENNE.--C. A. is still in town; you need have no anxiety about
him. He has received your message of Sunday last. The usual address is
always the best. Madame la Maréchale se porte bien. Inquire after the
28th.


767.--_Friday, October 24, 1856._

T.--Urbistondo est le nouveau Ministre de la Guerre. Je suis détenu tout
à contre-cœur dans un de mes chateaux en Espagne depuis la révolution
du Juillet passé avec toutes ses vicissitudes desastreuses. Vous savez
bien que je suis dévoué à votre cause. Conservez sur tout, je vous
implore, votre précieuse santé. Pourquoi mèconnait on en moi la retenue
pour l’orgueil, la fierté? Mais le monde juge toujours le pire des gens
comme moi-même, parvenus, inconnus.--B.


768.--_Saturday, October 25, 1856._

LA TETE AFRICAINE est partie en bonne santé; elle est sur mer et vogue
vers “son Soleil,” qu’elle atteindra sous peu de jours.


769.--_Tuesday, October 28, 1856._

T. Je marche que lentement, avec les nuages flottants sur les montagnes.
Denué des armoiries modernes, je me trouve seulement avec deux pièces
d’artillerie anciennes, un peu grotesques, avec les mots gravés sur leur
fronts, la sincérité est la fidélité.--B.


770.--_Friday, October 31, 1856._

S. M. U.--You little rogue, did you keep me waiting so long on Friday
night and then not come, to punish me for the previous evening? I waited
an hour, and then returned to the Viper’s, but of course did not go in.
Why, too, did you not come on Saturday? You know full well how I wanted
to see you. Do write to S. M. J., and never doubt the continuance of
affection and sweet remembrance of past happy days that still afford him
happy reflection.


771.--_Saturday, November 1, 1856._

T.--L’Ambassadeur pour la Russie n’est pas nommé. Les nouvelles de la
capital sont désolantes. Je suis dévoué à la même cause comme
auparavant. Barcelona est encore une fois tranquille.--B.


772.--_Monday, November 3, 1856._

NO. 11.--Many thanks for the box: the effect is wonderful. What a
splendid day for your trip. All but my heart was gay. L. has returned;
sends love to A. Why does not she write?


773.--_Monday, November 3, 1856._

T.--Zarco delle Valle est mentionné pour l’Ambassade. On dit aussi du
Baron del U., homme ferme, mais très lourd et retiré, et mal assorti
pour la diplomatique. On me demande une dépêche générale, mais à présent
je n’ai point de détails. Tandis que je pleurs le passé pour mon pays,
je regarde devant moi avec l’espérance.--B.


774.--_Monday, November 3, 1856._

M. W. H.--Put an end to all this misery and suffering. It was useless to
send W. G. to Brixton. Think of D. H., and drop the man, who, muffled up
and disguised, put her into the railway for London, on the evening of
Monday last, and returned to O. C. You cannot deceive or escape
me.--London, November 1.


775.--_Tuesday, November 4, 1856._

M. W. H.--On the 1st of October a young widow and a little boy left
Windsor, and were put down safely at No. 5, M. S. You see I know all. I
knew it next day. You cannot deceive me. Abandon this course, and send
M. to me, at E. H. H. London, then we will go to Scotland, for my
health.--Brixton, Nov. 3.


776.--_Tuesday, November 4, 1856._

E. is well and unchanged, and has not forgotten A., and never, never
will forget his nearest relative. Thanks for wit. The plan of A. was
admirable, and will be carried out. The letter was too long on the
voyage from England; its wishes were quickly complied with, but their
aim was frustrated by a fatality. E. would do that which he said he
would do for A. Never doubt of E.; he will see A., and soon, before he
joins his ship. Write.


777.--_Tuesday, November 4, 1856._

I.--Le chemin de fer d’Almanza s’avance qu’avec lenteur. Quelque
nouvelle lumière se lève aujourd’hui sur le cours de la politique
passée. Je suive votre cause. Je comprends toujours que trop lentement,
et je ne connais pas les détails de cette affaire de Saragoza.--B.


778.--_Wednesday, November 5, 1856._

I.--Mes nouvelles de Madrid sont désolantes. Les journaux sont saisis.
Le monde me semble plein de soupçon et malentendu, qu’empêchent
malheureusement et inutilement le cours des affaires.--B.


779.--_Wednesday, November 5, 1856._

S. B. H R. B G. adheres to the arrangement made on the 4th M. Sj Fenlo
Pott Sac ma F duxfe Zl. Hez maoyz lxtofshto bxxe. Sadeuxuzti pmzzmab tx
zoo ixc.


780.--_Thursday, November 6, 1856._

I.--Ou augmente l’armée. M. le Général, mon frère, se trouve dans notre
voisinage. Voulez-vous lui recevoir et conférer avec lui? Un nouveau
rayon de lumière éclate sur moi. Je ne perds pas l’espérance. Je ne
badine jamais sur les affaires de la politique.--B.


781.--_Friday, November 7, 1856._

J. N.--Fumt puff rt fvgtfs okdq, kgo odtkds pulwvjl is qugo pkdiwtkdlto
pvvfts Rfjt; rjl nwt wkn lkjbwl it lv nks um Bvo nv yviikgon wun puff rt
ovgt--ywkfitdn adtkywtn vg njgoks.--Nov. 6.--Y.


782.--_Monday, November 10, 1856._

I.--Sans aide-de-camp je perds souvent la route, plongeant dans les
ravins, pleins de la brûme; mais le lumière brille sur moi. Personne n’a
le clef de mes dépêches. Le même amour de la patrie que m’inspire
encore, regardant devant moi avec l’espérance, a toujours les animé.--B.


783.--_Saturday, November 15, 1856._

M.--It was understood that no more letters were expected from the south,
and was stated in the last that no facts had transpired here. Our views
remain. Letters for G. are to be forwarded if possible to-morrow.


784.--_Tuesday, November 18, 1856._

NOTHING FORGOTTEN.--Every remembrance respectfully and affectionately
treasured. If you have courage to hear the truth, trust to me, and meet
me. I know you will see this.--S., post-office, Jermyn-street,
Piccadilly.


785.--_Thursday, November 27, 1856._

NO. 2.--Deeply touched; happier but not quite happy, because my
conscience still convinceth me of sin. The star’s shining tho’, is upon
me, and, happen what may, its light will ever be my guide.


786.--_Tuesday, December 2, 1856._

TO AMY.--Vos dépêches, 29 Octobre et 7 Novembre, sont reçues; je suis
désolé de votre anxiété pour moi; vous auriez du recevoir les nouvelles
dont on vous a parlé le 28 Octobre; recherchez cette fois ci.
Ecrivez-moi à l’adresse comme: il ne me manque que vos nouvelles, sans
lesquelles je suis désolée et triste.--24 Novembre.


787.--_Wednesday, December 3, 1856._

FIRST--SPERANZA.


788.--_Saturday, December 6, 1856._

PECULATION.--P.


789.--_Saturday, December 6, 1856._

EACH villa on the Bosphorus looks a skreen new painted, or pretty
opera-scene.--Don Juan. R. B.


790.--_Tuesday, December 9, 1856._

TWENTY THOUSAND SIX HUNDRED and SEVENTY.


791.--_Tuesday, December 9, 1856._

TO C. and--E.--Your suppositions as to the principal thing, and also
about the last charge, are wrong. In whatever way I learned, it was not
in the way you suppose. A little more honesty, a little more
faithfulness on the part of some, two years ago, would have been well
received, and attended with consequences the most beneficial. Do not
fear a repetition of the same course. As to fraud and ingratitude, form
just what opinion pleases you, and stick to it till upset for another.
No letters from any quarter; not even answers which I ought to have got.
Who told A? or am I wrong there too. Break the ice, and let me know this
one thing at least.--F.


792.--_Friday, December 12, 1856._

C.--Very well. Please yourself, and I shall please myself. If you do not
choose to speak just be silent.--F.


793.--_Wednesday, December 17, 1856._

THE Duke’s Head being objected to, Little Dorrit is in great
distress.--Kate.


794.--_Monday, December 22, 1856._

TO Amy.--Vos nouvelles ont été expédiées seulement hier, mais ne
craignez rien si vous n’aviez pas un réponse aussi vite que vous
l’attendez, car d’apres une lettre reçue ce matin à B. S. votre petite
sœur change son domicile avec “la tête Africaine.” Elle se porte très
bien. Allez à la poste.


795.--_Tuesday, December 23, 24, 25, 1856._

MEIN LIEBER OHEIM! J’ai reçu vos lettres du 30 Octobre, 7 et 23
Novembre. Trouverez-vous le Times dans vos séjours? Depuis quand vous
manquent mes nouvelles? Je vous ai écrit le 29 Novembre et quelque temps
après. Continuez vos lettres, elles sont sauf à B. S.


796.--_Wednesday, December 24, 1856._

NO. 20, 670.


797.--_Monday, December 29, 1856._

A SYMPATHIZING FRIEND (of Leeds?) is sincerely THANKED by Mrs. J. 61.
889. Oct. 13, 1856.--Dec. 26, 1856.


798.--_Monday, December 29, 1856._

THE Admiral CLARENCE.--Call for Presto, at Post-office, Charing-cross.
Same name as before. Sir K--e. Dec. 26, 1856.


799.--_Wednesday, January 7, 1857._

TO AMY.--J’ai reçu vos nouvelles. Je les expédie par le courrier
d’aujourd’hui. Ce que j’ai fait n’était nue le devoir d’un ami dévoué,
et si j’ai réussi de vous tranquilliser je suis assez récompensé.--Le 6
Janvier, 1857.


800.--_Wednesday, January 14, 1857._

SPES, Bristol, is requested not to forget the good cause, in which
perseverance is sure to win the day.


801.--_Wednesday, January 14, 19, 1857._

Z.--Be ever the same, and remember all (your own words.) Do you act up
to your own advice? I need no such remembrance. Be sure you are ever
thought of, and just now, if possible, more than ever.--Yours, Z.


802.--_Saturday, January 24, 1857._

SEPOLTO VIVO.--Se tu m’abandonne son io riso luto di tutto lasciare.
Veramente si guira che si m’ama solamente com’ uno Fratello--lo
credo--non basta a me. Se tu nonne Vieni nell’ estate io partiro. Son
’io nell’ estremità della miseria, poco mancò ch’io non morissi. Solo
vivo per te.--S lo S.


803.--_Thursday, January 29, 1857._

EVA.--J. W. M. Y.


804.--_Thursday, January 29, 1857._

NEVER read it before. Had no previous knowledge of its contents. Never
would have taken it out had I known. Seen the marks in the others. Never
read the works. What mean this and some others just as blind? And in
other cases still, have there been no tempters, no traitors? Could I
have been so cruelly heartless, so utterly destitute of every sense of
honour or shame? Amid all the ills of the past, is there nothing to save
from such charges as these?


805.--_Saturday, January 31, 1857._

V. L.⁰₀⁰, Coventry.--Peeping Tom on the silk floors was sent to
Coventry, and now Peeping Tom intends to go there. Decimals.--Cygne.


806.--_Monday, February 2, 1857._

QUELL LUXE! and how much of your precious time must have been employed
for me. Before this I hope you have received my thanks. If you have
written since the 4th, the first week in February I shall receive it.


807.--_Tuesday, February 3, 1857._

L. P----t., 23 encore.--Je suis désolé.--d’apprendre votre maladie.
Venez au plutôt; cela vous remettra la santè! Je me porte bien.


808.--_Saturday, February 7, 1857._

LITTLE STAR.--I have your news of the 13th inst.; mine you will find in
Y. T. F. C. V. O. O. V. H.--January 30.


809.--_Thursday, February 12, 1857._

UNALTERABLE.--Every kind wish. Changed I never can be. Matters progress.
I hope ere long to be at rest, when my health may be restored. I long to
see you.


810.--_Monday, February 16, 1857._

LITTLE STAR.--I received Nos. 1, 2, YES, the same direction. My news you
can get when convenient.--8th February.


811.--_Tuesday, February 17, 1857._

TU ME CASSES le Cœur.--Good gracious! has it come to this? Tell me, tell
me, who you are.--G. C.


812.--_Friday, February 20, 1857._

UNALTERABLE.--I will endeavour to look on the “bright side.” Solitude
holds the very next rank to your society.


813.--_Saturday, February 21, 1857._

OF course, I understand the motives, but cannot consent to the removal
at present. Distance too great. Locality bad. The money is ready. A
thousand thanks.--February 20, 1857.


814.--_Monday, February 23, 24, 1857._

MA CHERE AMIE.--It is burnt; but I have it by heart. May I send you an
enclosure? Tell me in your next.--H.


815.--_Tuesday, February 24, 26, 1857._

NINTH OCTOBER, 1856. Harry true and determined to the last hour of his
existence. 13th May, 1857. Do not despond.


816.--_Tuesday, February 24, 1857._

THE BLACK VELVET DRESS, which was sent back by rail and coach in a very
compressed parcel slightly covered with brown paper, and unaccompanied
by any letter, has arrived as safely as under the circumstances was
possible.


817.--_Wednesday, February 25, 1857._

HEALTH and HAPPINESS. I approve.--ADA.


818.--_Monday, March 2, 1857._

LITTLE STAR.--Since Nos. 1, 2, nothing received. Have you any news of
the 11th and 20th? Have you seen the Z. of the 16? Why such long
silence?


819.--_Tuesday, March 3, 1857._

TO AMICUS.--Pray WRITE again, with particulars. Confidence shall be
inviolate. There are two there. Has the name of the one intended four or
five letters? At any rate answer this.


820.--_Tuesday, March 3, 1857._

HARRY’S ADVOCATE R***, actively hostile. This is unexpected, and time
will prove that it was undeserved. H. may yield on the R. C. question,
but no power on earth will cause any alteration on his part as regards
the declaration of October 9, 1856.


821.--_Thursday, March 5, 1857._

J.--The 19th, 26th, and Saturday, 11 o’clock, all right. Soon again as
possible. Far from well. Letters, long ones, at the old place.--H.


822.--_Friday, March 6, 1857._

ALL friendly and favourably settled this day, March 5,
1857.--North-street.


823.--_Monday, March 9, 1857._

A. C. P.--Any request from you is sacred, and it shall ever be complied
with. Trust my discretion, as you trust my sense of honour. Pray take
care of yourself; banish all painful thoughts, and seek for calmness and
composure in your judgment alone, and not in any artificial and
temporary appliance. May God grant you the peace of mind and happiness
you deserve, and may He allow us to meet again in better days.


824.--_Saturday, March 21, 1857._

UNALTERABLE.--Say that a visit would be agreeable to you, and the sea
should not long divide us. Such a change would be the means of restoring
me to my usual health; but if not, the solitude of this place is more
suitable to my present state of mind.--M. C. T.


825.--_Saturday, March 28, 1857._

TO HIDE and SEEK.--My despatches! No, there are some things money cannot
do, and all the ill-gotten wealth of London will not purchase my
“Egyptienne.”--E. J. W.


826.--_Monday, March 30, 1857._

TO a CHRISTIAN.--You don’t know their antecedents. It is not easy. My
daughter has two toes joined together. I have not seen her for seven
years.--E. J. W.


827.--_Saturday, April 4, 1857._

TO UNALTERABLE. M. C. T.--A visit would be pleasing to her, when
convenient to yourself.--H.


828.--_Wednesday, April 8, 1857._

PERTHSHIRE ELECTION.--Proof instead of assertion. The writer is welcome
to call at the residence of the party written to. Correspondence or a
meeting elsewhere declined. Call to-morrow.


829.--_Thursday, April 9, 1857._

PERTHSHIRE ELECTION.--Volunteers do not make conditions, but they are
accepted. A reward will be given. It was not supposed the information
was tendered from benevolence to either party.


830.--_Monday, April 13, 1857._

NOT SUCCESSFUL.--THE STEPS.


831.--_Wednesday, April 15, 1857._

UNSUCCESSFUL.--THE STEPS. Sorry for bad news. Communicate through
bookselling channel.


832.--_Friday, April 17, 1857._

V FLECHE.--Is despatches sufficiently blown for the coup de grâce selon
la loi? There never was the mortal being could escape the patient
search. &c.--Cage.--Signe.


833.--_Tuesday, April 21, 1857._

TO HIDE and SEEK.--I can never touch that money; the honest London
merchant has made a bad debt without a dividend. Help us against
despatches, and then every indulgence, but free possession as a
guarantee.--E. J. W.


834.--_Thursday, April 30, 1857._

ZANTIPPUS RAVEN.--I will not injure you. Do your duty to those now bound
to you.


835.--_Friday, May 8, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 22, 25, 1857._

LOUISA.--Si l’amitié et votre cœur généreux vous a entrainée de faire le
premier pas vers un précipice, il a en même temps ouvert la tombe pour
ensévelir vos amis. Je vous en conjure, tranquillisez ceux sur votre
sort aussi vite que possible.


836.--_Friday, May 15, 1857._

MORMONISM.--Dear John, Kimball has declared in the “Deseret News” that
you shall not run at large and lecture against Mormonism; also that
Lavinia is divorced from you. Pray take care of yourself, and WRITE at
once to Fred. (American papers please copy.)


837.--_Monday, May 18, 1857._

TO HIDE and SEEK.--Despatches are to be despatched. Help us--and you can
powerfully; and every indulgence that the fondest mother can desire
shall be yours.--E. J. W.


838.--_Friday, May 22, 1857._

TO HIDE and SEEK.--Mrs. B., late of St. James’s-street, proposes a legal
document, but does not know your hiding-place. I will not accept any
English legal document. One of the first lawyers in the city of London
told me I should always be crossed in all I attempted; and I could not
get the competent men to act for me lately in the Court of Chancery,
although the costs were deposited in hard cash. Men, to whom I had
advanced ready money at 5 per cent., have laughed at me when I talked of
recovery by law. My money has been stolen from my pocket-book, and yet
no redress. In short I am hors la loi; but, fortunately, I know it.--E.
J. W.


839.--_Tuesday, May 26, 1857._

L. P. V.--Home influences should be continued, if practicable. Very much
may undoubtedly be done; but, at present, it is impossible to say how
much. Every day’s delay strengthens the habit, and increases the
difficulty. The best course will be to WRITE at once to A.M., care of
Mr. Cull, 13, Lombard-street. Arrange an early interview with him, and
detail every minute particular. You are perfectly safe, as he will
receive everything in the strictest confidence. He may very possibly
effect a complete cure.


840.--_Friday, June 5, 1857._

QUEEN of HEARTS.--When is our picnic to come off? My holydays are nearly
over, and I shall not ask my masters for more, unless you write and tell
me you wish it. After I left school I was down in Norfolk three times,
but you were not visible. Since I saw you I have learnt something by
heart, and if I get your direction I will let you know it.


841.--_Wednesday, June 10, 1857._

THE EVERGREEN OAK might fade and fall, but for the strong clinging arms
of the Ivy, which, once grown, can never be removed alive. Types will
appear to-morrow, and acorns may be quietly looked for in a few days.


842.--_Monday, June 15, 1857._

IVY.--Your last is an inexhaustible source of happiness. The value of
the types can only be conceived by you. Make the hour 10 to half-past.
First proposal too late for you. Oak leaves early in July.


843.--_Wednesday, June 17, 1857._

QUEEN of HEARTS.--Your conduct is very cruel, and can only inflict pain
and protract suspense; so (if you do not desire that) write and inform
us of your welfare. A sufficiently long absence has only served to
render strong feelings yet stronger, and it is time now to decide on the
point of the compass I steer. You promised to fill the canvas for me;
and I expect at least two feet of fulfilment of promise.


844.--_Thursday, June 18, 1857._

LORELEY.--45, 46, and 47, RECEIVED. Time named for reading does nicely.
Summer tour approved for reasons given. A budget ready and waiting shall
be increased for next time. Quite well, under advice. A bulletin wanted.
Thanks.--Yours, Tomkins.


845.--_Friday, June 26, 1857._

LORELEY.--48, RECEIVED. Bell Primrose. Mr. T. leaves at dawn
28th.--Tomkins.


846.--_Saturday, June 27, 1857._

THE REINDEER SONG.--So little did it appear to be applicable to the
singer of this melody, that no token will be sent unless it is proved by
another advertisement that it really was meant. Through an error this
did not appear last week.


847.--_Tuesday, June 30, 1857._

ICH DIEN.--I now call upon you. Those who could discover the secret in
the most secluded nook in Europe can do anything. Double the signs.
Banc, Signe, Hungary beyond the Theiss.


848.--_Thursday, July 2, 1857._

J. E. R.--Can you express doubt when the height is already won? It is
now the affair of time alone. I saw myself pictured forth in colours too
faithful. I could not desire more.


849.--_Thursday, July 2, 1857._

TO HIDE and SEEK.--I shall get my child, and the London merchant always
has and always will pay 20_s._ in the £. By your deed my reversion is
much improved, and as the trustees are to be changed, it is worth a good
round sum; but you have received, since January 11, 1856, exactly £100
dividends on the Western of France, and if I pay the reward you must
expect----.--E. J. W.


850.--_Tuesday, July 7, 1857._

NICHT EINE MILLION.--Genug für Alles. My honour is pledged, and I am
true, Aber sie ist sehr knapp mit dem Gelde.--Darf ich auf die
----borgen? Die Juden thun es zu hohen zinsen.--Zigeuner.


851.--_Thursday, July 9, 1857._

ALL SERENE.--Tummidge is through. John Dykes, that poor old man, is
dead, &c.


852.--_Friday, July 10, 1857._

LE CHAR L’ATTEND.--Decimals.--Our Swan is not a crow. See how proudly he
rears his snow-white crest, distends his beautiful silvery wings, and
spurns the wave, as he majestically strides forwards.--Cygne.


853.--_Saturday, July 18, 1857._

REVEAL the NAME.


854.--_Tuesday, July 28, 1857._

G. H.--Luke 15th chap. 10 and 16--to 24.


855.--_Thursday, July 30, 1857._

MIMI may rely on secrecy; that is the only addition that can be made to
the intimation already given, and which is rightly supposed to have been
intended for the person who now writes more distinctly under the above
signature.


856.--_Friday, July 31, 1857._

MIMI.--You can trust your correspondent, M. H. K. All is sincere, and
well meant, and the most implicit confidence may be relied upon.


857.--_Saturday, August 1, 1857._

KALENDS.--Bird has flown. 400 miles east of August, 1854. Thanks.


858.--_Monday, August 3, 1857._

A. T.--We each forgive and love you, but entreat you to COME HOME. No T;
no D. All well. E. has broken it. Our prayers are for you.


859.--_Tuesday, August 4, 5, 6, 1857._

NIDDRIE, 13th; so come on 12th. Tell E. J.


860.--_Wednesday, August 12, 1857._

NIDDRIE, on 13th.--Do not come. There is foul play somewhere. A letter
will explain.--J. S.


861.--_Thursday, August 13, 1857._

M. D.--ACCEPT my sincere but sorrowful THANKS. No. 19 if possible, but
very doubtful. Be cautious, you are watched. A fellow-sufferer.


862.--_Friday, August 14, 15, 1857._

N. M.--August 12.--The second Saturday has passed.


863.--_Saturday, August 15, 1857._

M. H. K.--Unalterable, unchangeable. We must act with firmness; our
affairs will then be settled in a way most conducive to our own
interests, and everything arranged according to our wishes by the
appointed time.--Ever yours, Mimi, August 13, 1857.


864.--_Tuesday, August 18, 1857._

CUMMING to PET.--Je ne puis plus supporter cette existence. Viens avec
moi je t’en prie-je suis si malheureux. Il faut m’écrire. The old
address. God bless you.


865.--_Thursday, August 20, 1857._

MIMI.--Will you kindly explain yours of the 13th? Have you received my
two letters? Yours ever, M. H. K.


866.--_Thursday, August 20, 1857._

CUMMING to PET.--Je vous importune trop. Vous voudriez me voir partir
loin de vous. Votre avenir sera plus heureux que le mien; moi, malade
d’esprit et de corps, seul au monde, que ferai-je? Pourquoi m’avez-vous
parlé de ces lettres? N’avez-vous plus de confiance en moi? Je n’ai pas
encore été voir notre père, parceque j’ai été trop souffrant. Vous aurez
de mes nouvelles mardi prochain. Adieu, mon épouse chérie. Soyez bonne.
Je vois aime trop maintenant pour vous haïr plus tard. Je ne vous
abandonnerai jamais.--Infelice.


867.--_Monday, August 24, 1857._

M. H. K.--I have nothing to explain. Our wishes to settle our affairs
are the same. If you would Write, and communicate everything, there
would be no difficulty. You know my address. I wish my home in the
country was nearer yours; but if you are ready to arrange our business I
hope shortly to see you. Ever yours, Mimi, August 21, 1857.


868.--_Tuesday, August 25, 1857._

MIMI.--You have received an address to which you can FORWARD me a
LETTER. Many miles separate us. My position at the present time does not
perhaps warrant me in going further. I have and do certainly entertain
the highest respect and regard for you, but many difficulties present
themselves which I cannot here explain, except I were assured of a
letter reaching you, and that only by receiving one from yourself in the
first instance. This is the only course I can adopt.--Yours ever, M. H.
K.


869.--_Wednesday, August 26, 1857._

ERINNERUNG Und TEUMERFORT--Tyran.--No.--So very many THANKS for the TWO
kind LETTERS, and for the delicate consideration your caution evinced
for me. Can you, through this medium, show me you have noticed this? Do
not write.


870.--_Saturday, August 29, 1857._

M. H. K.--You must be faithful to your promise, and confirm all I wrote.
You know my address, and be assured of its safety. Whenever you wish it
I will write to you; indeed, now our correspondence should be constant.
I never can forgive my mistake of yesterday; but you know it could not
be intended.--Yours ever, Mimi.--August 29, 1857.


871.--_Monday, August 31, 1857._

ERINNERUNG UND TEUMERFORT.--Tyran.--No.--Ten thousand thanks. This is my
first advertisement. O wise Isis, have I lifted thy veil? When, oh!
when. ***.--M. D.


872.--_Tuesday, September 1, 1857._

MIMI.--I wish you to WRITE to me at once, with your present address.
Forward my letter to the Post-office, Royal-hill, Greenwich, S.E. I have
been expecting to hear daily.--Yours ever, M. H. K.


873.--_Wednesday, September 2, 1857._

R. WELLBELOVE.--I have RECEIVED your very kind NOTE, and almost expected
another. Most willingly will I give you what you have lost, but I want
the size. That every blessing may attend you is the most sincere wish of
your relative, M. D.


874.--_Thursday, September 3, 1857._

CUMMING to PET.--Madame CUMMING TROUVERA une LETTRE pour elle à la poste
restante, chez Morris, imprimeur, 35, Ludgate-hill; Ce sera la dernière.


875.--_Tuesday, September 8, 1857._

M. H. K.--I shall be in town the evening of the 10th, and shall hope to
see you the following day, when all our business may be settled.--Yours
ever, Mimi.--September 6, 1857.


876.--_Tuesday, September 8, 1857._

M. H. K.--A LETTER, of great importance, was FORWARDED to Greenwich, as
you wished. Write at once, and state everything distinctly, as it
relates to affairs of great consequence. I trust the answer will be
favourable in every way, and shall be very anxious for its
arrival.--Yours ever, Mimi.--September 4th.


877.--_Wednesday, September 9, 1857._

MIMI.--NO LETTER has been RECEIVED up to the present time, September 8,
otherwise you would most certainly have had an answer. Will you write
again at once.--Yours ever, M. H. K.


878.--_Thursday, September 10, 1857._

MY DEAR SISTER.--I shall be in London the 10th (this day), when I hope
to find you there, as our affairs are in a very unsettled state at
present.--Yours ever, Mimi.


879.--_Saturday, September 12, 1857._

NATHAN.--The portrait you have drawn is far from flattering. I hope yonr
inferences are wrong, as the facts from which they are drawn never
happened. Still I cannot help feeling grateful for the motive prompting
your letter. I do not know you; it is for you to decide whether it would
be advantageous to do so. I shall be in England in October.


880.--_Monday, September 14, 1857._

BRISTOL.--RECEIVED. Not in the way suggested. No. 9 has charge of it,
and will deliver it in proper time.


881.--_Monday, September 21, 1857._

FLORENCE.--Ring yesterday. Anchor in a day or two.


882.--_Tuesday, September 22, 1857._

M. H. K.--I have again been disappointed in not seeing you. When you
have performed your promise, an answer will be immediately returned. You
know how anxious I must be to arrange every part of our affair.--Yours
ever, Mimi. Home, 20th.


883.--_Wednesday, September 23, 1857._

MIMI.--You are labouring under some mistake. I have never yet received
one letter; my promise to reply when that arrives shall be kept. Write
at once, as I am equally anxious.--Yours ever, M. H. K.


884.--_Wednesday, September 23, 1857._

HORSESHOE.--I am most anxious about you. Why don’t you write? I returned
on Saturday. All went wrong. Alarm is well, but eager for
news.--Vinegarette, Bath, 21st of September, 1857.


885.--_Saturday, September 26, 1857._

DANSKE veuner i London bringes herved et hjerteligt Levvel fra F. S.
Bang.


886.--_Tuesday, September 29, 1857._

HORSESHOE.--Your LETTER was RECEIVED on Saturday, and greatly has it
relieved my mind. Do you remember our last conversation? If it can be
arranged speedily all will be well. I feared you were ill. I am better
than I have been.--Vinegarette, Bath.


887.--_Tuesday, October 6, 1857._

M. H. K.--My intention was to be in town the whole of next month to
arrange our business. If you have determined not to be there it will be
useless for me to think of it. I thought everything had been nearly
settled, as I never forget a promise.--Yours ever, Mimi, October 2,
1857.


888.--_Wednesday, October 7, 1857._

MIMI.--I beg of you to WRITE to me to the address I have before given
you. You are evidently making a great mistake, as I have never made you
one promise, except that of writing when I receive a letter from you.
If you will do this, and give me your address, you shall hear from me.
It is, I fear, a case of mistaken identity.--Yours ever, M. H. K.


889.--_Monday, October 12, 1857._

P. P. P.--SECRECY.


890.--_Thursday, October 15, 1857._

P. P. P.--SECRECY. No letter will either be shown or given up, but
destroyed directly after receipt, if so wished by the writer, who may
communicate without fear.


891.--_Thursday, October 15, 1857._

M. H. K.--Your LETTER was FORWARDED, as you desired, to the post-office,
Royal-hill, Greenwich, S.E., on the 8th. I am anxious to hear whether
you received it.--Yours ever, Mimi.--October 13, H. W.


892.--_Monday, October 26, 1857._

T. S.--THANKS.--Disappointed, yet thankful. Am I too indifferent to you
to be favoured with a line? Does your seal express your feelings or what
mine ought to be? He is enough: still human nature needs human sympathy.
I am very sad.--O. W. D.


893.--_Tuesday, October 27, 1857._

CUMMING to PET.--Pourquoi n’avez vous pas écrit? Il y a une lettre pour
vous a la poste-restante, Ludgate-hill.


894.--_Thursday, October 29, 1857._

TOTAL £2,700: Balance £18.--North-street, October 27, 1857.


895.--_Monday, November 2, 1857._

X.--I cautioned, but to no purpose. The £2,300 are gone. This makes
£6,000 lost in that way--and all hard cash. The cup is now full.
Foreigners have the preference; but Decimals will face the wolf a second
time.--Cygne.


896.--_Monday, November 2, 1857._

YES.--Hold! till know all. My friend middling yet. All for you, and give
up two years. If yes, put the signal in a sentence home: if lost, a
blotted inside envelope at home. Up! up! upon relying Write.


897.--_Tuesday, November 3, 1857._

X.--I must send the poor little girl round by sea to be tossed on the
Atlantic for six days. My poverty, not my will consents. Is it true Nena
Sahib was stripped of his patrimony? Decimals and poverty--£2,300 and
starvation. St. Swithin.--Cygne.


898.--_Tuesday, November 3, 4, 1857._

BIANCHINA.--Always, always the same. Don’t forget.


899.--_Saturday, November 7, 1857._

BIANCHINA.--WRITE when you can till the great day comes, when words will
give place to actions.


900.--_Saturday, November 14, 1857._

TO W.--If you really wish to see me, let me know what day you go to D.,
and where I can find you.--Mimi, Nov. 12, 1857.


901.--_Tuesday, November 17, 1857._

BIANCHINA.--I have not heard from you for so long. Why?


902.--_Tuesday, November 17, 1857._

X.--I stand no chance in this race with foreigners, because I am an
Englishman. Nena Sahib. St. Swithin. Decimals.--Cygne.


903.--_Tuesday, November 17, 1857._

POLLY.--I have referred. Truly it applies. Need I again assure thee.
Review calmly and sincerely what we have each since experienced, and
forget not thy first obligation. Write, I entreat thee.--John.


904.--_Friday, November 20, 1857._

BIANCHINA.--SECOND NOT RECEIVED. It is a pity. Never mind. Always the
same.


905.--_Monday, November 23, 1857._

BIANCHINA.--I am yours a thousand times more than ever. Remember you may
depend upon me. For God’s sake write when you can--t’adoro sempre piu.
You belong to me.


906.--_Thursday, November 26, 1857._

CUMMING to PET.--Il y a une LETTRE pour toi, la même adresse.--Ton
dévoué.


907.--_Friday, November 27, 1857._

M. D., your COMMUNICATION has been received, and calls for my THANKS and
gratitude. I had thought it possible we might have met. Your faithful
Friend.


908.--_Friday, November 27, 1857._

Z.--Chanced to see yours to-day. Lameness prevented myself taking it. I
was assured it did appear in a different part. Pray forgive me for the
neglect of others. A grateful heart is yours. Let me explain personally.
I am grieved.


909.--_Saturday, December 5, 1857._

MY dear SISTER,--Pray perform your promise in writing to me. If my
proposal had been accepted all would have been well.--MIMI, H. W. Do not
delay.


910.--_Tuesday, December 8, 1857._

EZRA.--Oh! WRITE immediately and often. Take care of yourself. Cheer up.
All right. Good-night. God bless you, my darling son.--“The
Ezras.”--December 5, 1857.


911.--_Monday, December 14, 1857._

MY dear SISTER.--Why not grant my request, and write as you promised? By
keeping me in a state of uncertainty all our business is delayed. I have
done all in my power. As soon as I have received your letter with the
particulars no time shall be lost. If you wish to settle our affairs,
the sooner an interview takes place the better.--H. W., December 11.


912.--_Tuesday, December 15, 1857._

M. D.--I am very sorry I missed you, and more so that we cannot meet as
suggested. Satisfactory explanations shall be given.


913.--_Tuesday, December 15, 1857._

H. W., February 20, 1854.--Nearly four years’ absence and indifference
leaves us both at liberty to act as we please independently of each
other.--M. B., Dec. 14, 1857.


914.--_Thursday, December 17, 1857._

THE EZRAS.--LETTER RECEIVED--much joy. Let your whereabouts be speedily
communicated to your mother. God bless you.--HELEN.


915.--_Wednesday, December 23, 1857._

CUMMING to PET.--Il y a une LETTRE pour vous--la même adresse. Je vous
attends avec beaucoup d’inquietude. Venez bientôt je vous en prie. Votre
dévoué.


916.--_Wednesday, December 30, 1857._

M. D.---- No. 31.--It will afford me great pleasure under any
circumstances.


917.--_Wednesday, December 30, 1857._

CUMMING to PET.--Quand je vous vois, je vous dirai tout ce que je pense
de votre conduite. Ce n’est pas bien de vous. Il y a des lettres pour
vous. Toujours fidèle.


918.--_Wednesday, December 30, 1857._

X. CHEOPS.--No, no. Hands off my child. I am no longer bound by the laws
of humanity, and had it been a boy, yes; but I will not risk my little
gipsey girl amongst the pestilential marshes of Hungary, though there
secure against every power.--B. Z. Q., 666.--CYGNE.


919.--_Thursday, December 31, 1857._

X.--CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS. O, no language can describe what I have had to
endure in endeavouring to earn an honest living in my dear country.
Kicked out of my beautiful native city into the vilest--and now wounded
in my dearest affections. I was told it would be so, Alec. Boxmoor on
the one hand. Decimals by the right. Eggs by the left. Comprenez-vous?
Yes, I did it.--CYGNE.


920.--_Friday, January 1, 1858._

TO T.--After the letter, do not for a moment suppose that I could make
use of his house, money, or connexion. I adhere to mine of yesterday.
The sacrifice you shall have to make will be the truest test of your
sincerity--therefore, pause.--N. and H.


921.--_Saturday, January 9, 1858._

M. D.--My meaning has not been clearly expressed. You have entirely
misunderstood the feelings that actuated me. I, too, have resolved to do
wonders, but it all ends as described.


922.--_Thursday, February 4, 1858._

X. CHEOPS X.--As agreed, I have tried again to earn an honest living,
and I earn about one-half as much as foreigners, and I see nothing but
poverty and misery for myself and child.--Ciphering--decimals,
999.--CYGNE.


923.--_Wednesday, February 10, 11, 12, 1858._

DOES HE REPENT? To Him who can Understand.--Is it for one flower to
pine, droop, and die, or does the other flower sympathize in the misery
it has caused its rose? Now, or it will be too late.


924.--_Saturday, February 13, 1858._

DOES HE REPENT? for Whom? Guess.--My answer is a thousand times YES, on
one condition, that the rose cast off the thorn. The violet will then be
hers for ever. Do trust and have confidence, and the rose shall be
happy, for nothing then shall ever separate the violet from “its rose.”
Decide quickly, for time presses both, though for exactly opposite
purposes. Will not the rose trust and support the “other flower”?


925.--_Monday, February 15, 1858._

DOES HE REPENT?--There being no answer, it is now too late. Ah, Flower,
whose name cannot be told, if thou hadst known the things that were for
thy peace thou wouldst have asked forgiveness, ere this, of thy partner
Rose. Now for the truth.


926.--_Monday, February 15, 1858._

YOU ASK IF HE REPENTS, he only awaits your initials, or other sufficient
proof of your identity, to answer this question. If preferred, address
Amiens, P. O., Old Cavendish-street, W.


927.--_Tuesday, February 23, 1858._

SPES IN DEO.--RECEIVED.


928.--_Wednesday, March 10, 1858._

CAN the Rose be drooping whose thorns wounded the hands that would have
tended it? That Rose is now, alas! beyond the reach of those hands, and
they yet fear mischance. But write at once, or advertise more
particularly, and a letter will be sent by “Appletree.”


929.--_Saturday, March 13, 1858._

A WEED on which a Rose has flung fragrance cares nothing for a few
scratches. An advertisement, stating that a letter has been addressed to
it, in its own real name, at the General Post-office, would delight it.
The assumed name is ANTI-CHESTERFIELD.


930.--_Saturday, April 10, 1858._

IF “Arrietta” relented, the horizon would soon brighten; perhaps if all
were revealed, she might do this without cause of regret. An oak, far
from being uprooted by the passing storm, then proves its power to
cherish the yielding and tender vine.--ES--UB.


931.--_Wednesday, April 14, 1858._

APRIL 10.--Will ARRIETA let me MEET with a mutual friend? All may be
well. Everything depends on you. From home this week.--TS--YB.


932.--_Thursday, April 15, 1858._

SOPHIA W . . . . M.--“Ti ho scritto tante volte inutilmente.” What is to
be done? Do you wish the letters, &c., published or not? Answer quickly,
for time presses. Shall I be more explicit?--Yours, TICHBORN.


933.--_Wednesday, April 28, 1858._

X TRIBE X QUIET.--Everything just as suspected, £100 of no use at all;
in future at least £500. Plants. Je m’en moque. 3 A 333 BJB.--CYGNE.


934.--_Saturday, May 1, 1858._

A. S.--“All is right.” I am very sorry that I did so, to cause you
uneasiness, and will not again even ask. You know all that words can
say--time cannot change. Thus, accept, &c. (and as to which I need not
repeat); till then I only say A. S.


935.--_Monday, May 3, 1858._

X BLUE EYES X.--I protested (in writing), both before and after, against
that “Genug für Alles” business. The Moravian March Rose must give
“Auskunft” and guarantee £500.--Toes.--CYGNE.


936.--_Thursday, May 6, 1858._

SOPHIA W . . . . . M.--In looking over the MSS. Jouold DISCOVERED the
MISSING SLIP written at the hotel, Plymouth; also, “Il mio Tiranno.” All
is now ready but the dedication. Which do you think? Father or
son!--TICHBORNE.


937.--_Saturday, May 8, 1858._

JE dois et je veux savoir.


938.--_Tuesday, May 11, 1858._

TO A. S.--I have seen May 1st (and 8th?) All is right and settled. Words
are needless. Be tranquil.


939.--_Friday, May 14, 1858._

A. S.--This is only to thank you for what I have seen. My pleasure is
the hope that I interpret rightly the last word but two. Give or get me
the earliest permission possible to send the “Enigma;” and, when you
see what was wanting, you will find there was none. I am gone away till
the middle of July. I need not say where now. Only one day’s post.
J’attends.


940.--_Monday, May 17, 1858._

MODELLA de 1854!--Ah! voudrai-je n’avoir pas proféré une pétition si
facile à concéder, mais dont le refus si inattendu, et l’observation qui
l’accompagnait, m’a causé tant de douleur. Le destin un prépare une
pélérinage d’outre-Manche; pendant cet exile vos lettres chéries seront
mon unique consolation. Si depuis quelque temps elles sont moins
démonstratives, je suis sure que vous l’ignorez. Ancor, séparé ou non
séparé. “Vi giuro eterna fede.”


941.--_Thursday, May 20, 1858._

DEAR A. S.--This time I write first. All is right, &c. You know, &c.
Time, &c. Please answer if, and as soon as, you can. All is
fixed.--Yours, &c., M.


942.--_Saturday, May 22, 1858._

TO LIDFORD.--15_s._ in town, besides cab hire (in case of need). In
England--35_s._ per diem, inclusive of hotel (and exclusive of railway)
expenditure. To second query, Yes. To third query, No, “as to language.”


943.--_Wednesday, May 26, 1858._

VI GIURO ETERNA FEDE! Nothing can ever change me. Séparé ou non séparé,
“toujours fidèle” jusqu’à la mort! Dieu vous garde! MODELLA de 1854.


944.--_Monday, June 7, 8, 1858._

GAS--Tar--Shoes. Shakspeare’s Bust;--Aubert and Klaftenburg;--money for
the present;--proposals for the future. I wish to send to you. No
inquiry shall be made. Rely. One line by post. Quite broken down. Oh,
come.


945.--_Thursday, June 17, 1858._

HEARTSEASE.--Pray be calm. Do not be too eager. All will yet be right.
Do you agree to meet, and part no more. Some are foes--find a friend.
The flowers in the conservatory, I suppose, bloomed last week. Do not
part with anything. Do write. Vale.


946.--_Saturday, June 19, 1858._

HEARTSEASE.--On the brow of the vale. Received with thanks. Agreed as
desired, if not too long delayed. Foes I never feared. Friends are
sometimes treacherous. I have not forgotten the conservatory. As ever.
W.


947.--_Saturday, June 26, 1858._

Y. Z.--Can there be happiness without confidence? Alas, I see you doubt.
It can never be received. It would be entire ruin. Can you sign it? In a
month, death or victory.


948.--_Monday, June 28, 1858._

Y. Z.--As you desire. Your sincerity is very satisfactory. Thanks for
your faithfulness, it is duly appreciated, and shall be well rewarded.
Hope on a little longer. Did you notice Saturday?


949.--_Wednesday, July 7, 1858._

X. GAMINS X.--I CANNOT LECTURE at Coventry as contemplated. Although
reported in the “Endowed Schools Commission” as receiving £80 per annum,
I get but £50, and you know with that without board, &c.--E. J. W.,
Cygne.


950.--_Tuesday, July 13, 1858._

M W--T V W--sgzmjs--4. 10hl--O D N 19--8zkro--enrx--qdstqn N
25--zlP--zlzje--ntt. UY2.


951.--_Tuesday, July 13, 1858._

M. R.--E. R. and “not” M. R. worked illicit still third 2 months, 1855,
at H. G.--M. R. unknown at “16 or 7.” Landlady at 16, dead. M. R. or E.
R., age 20. Query, has E. R. a child 4 or 5 years old?--C. F. Field,
Private Inquiry-office, Devereux-court, W.C.


952.--_Wednesday, July 14, 1858._

ESPERANZA.--J’attends votre lettre avec impatience. Dites-moi où je dois
vous écrire et quand je puis venir. Soyez ferme et tout ira bien. Votre
tout dévoué.


953.--_Thursday, July 15, 1858._

ESPERANZA.--Cela ne sera jamais. Ces enfantillages ne m’effrayent pas.
Plus que jamais je suis décidé à tout avoir, et une vingtaine de ces
lettres injustes et cruelles ne me détourneront pas de mon projet. Vous
savez ce que je ferais si vous me faisiez perdre la partie. Vous n’avez
qu’à rester fidèle à vos promesses.


954.--_Wednesday, July 21, 1858._

ESPERANZA.--J’attends toujours une lettre: si je ne la reçois pas
bientôt j’irai vous voir. L’affaire marche bien, mais votre
indifférence et votre silence m’ont beaucoup affligés. Votre tout
dévoué.


955.--_Saturday, July 24, 1858._

ESPERANZA.--Say how a letter can reach you, and you will receive
important information. Address, E. D. V. X., Post-office, Jersey.


956.--_Monday, July 26, 1858._

ESPERANZA.--Il me semble que vous m’avez tout-à-fait oublié. Pourquoi ne
m’avez-vous pas écrit? Au moins, dites-moi où je puis vous écrire. Comme
il s’agit maintenant de notre bonheur futur, vous pouviez être un peu
moins inconstant. Votre dévoué.


957.--_Tuesday, July 27, 1858._

ACT 7. V. R. Cap. 30 and 31. Parole.


958.--_Wednesday, July 28, 1858._

DECIMALS to CHEOPS.--I have done the State some service, and they know
it; but I intend to do a great deal more. Coventry, like Spitalfields,
will not assist us; but the form must be gone through. Address E. J.
Wilson, Ennis, Ireland.


959.--_Monday, August 2, 1858._

DECIMALS to CHEOPS.--T. C. JONES, Esq., DIED last year in America. It is
exceedingly unfortunate. He and I were the only merchants who thoroughly
understood the whole system. Address E. J. Wilson, Ennis, Ireland.


960.--_Wednesday, August 4, 1858._

UNDECIDED.--From OLD TOM.


961.--_Wednesday, August 11, 1858._

DECIMALS to CHEOPS.--It was the perseverance of one man that sent Lord
Bacon to the Tower. Not Coventry, but Liverpool, Liverpool, Liverpool.
Address E. J. Wilson, Ennis, Ireland.


962.--_Thursday, August 12, 1858._

BLUE BELL.--Letters received the 10th. Henceforth I have every
confidence--it was only this trial I feared. I have had a dreadful
letter from P. Trust no one. Look again 17th. Will try what I can do the
other way. Keep up your spirits.--LOCHINVAR.


963.--_Wednesday, August 18, 1858._

BLUE BELL.--Your letter received. Your feelings on receipt will tell you
mine. Address given will always find. I leave for the continent in a
week. Will continue to communicate thus. Never mind the P. S. question.
Write when can.--Lochinvar.


964.--_Friday, August 20, 1858._

ALL’S WRONG, Wrong. From Old Tom. Write.


965.--_Saturday, August 21, 1858._

BLUE BELL.--The genuine, truthful, earnest style of your letters is
deeply appreciated. Do not alter it. For C. read J. Two months. L. has
and always will have perfect confidence. Keep L. advised as to all
movements at head quarters.--Constantia.


966.--_Saturday, August 28, 1858._

CONSTANTIA.--Trust our kind friend (under promise) with all except means
of intelligence. Say how grateful I am for kindness to you. Say nothing
to T. at present. B. B. could not offend. L.’s confidence and respect
increase daily. Have taken measures to frustrate our enemy. Keep aloof
from this person. Advise our kind friend to do the same as terrible
disclosures impend (not affecting us).--L.


967.--_Thursday, September 2, 1858._

DECIMALS to CHEOPS.--Honest John Bull is pig-headed, but he begins to
grasp this business. I claim to rank with Cobden, Bright, and Rowland
Hill. I go on. (Long R---- Joey). Address E. J. Wilson, Ennis, Ireland.


968.--_Wednesday, September 8, 1858._

BLUE BELL.--Should have written sooner, but am far away. Write as often
as can; ’tis all I have to cheer me. Now and then. The person you so
much dislike (a Lady) is the enemy alluded to. I am not very friendly
with him whose visits you advised me of. Do not let him gain any
information from you, and believe nothing he may report. Cheer up. Every
confidence. Be cautious.--L.


969.--_Wednesday, September 22, 1858._

CONSTANTIA.--Received two. That which has worried you is part of a plan.
Heed it not. If that which you allude to is not given it must be done
without. Rely upon L’s affection and determination. Who says ’tis for
the best? 1st November. The time will pass, slow as it lags. Were it 10
instead of 2 it would make no change. Pray write soon--tell me of your
health. B. B. must be very steadfast, and close ears to the insidious
whisperings, which will be continued.--VIOLET.


970.--_Wednesday, September 29, 1858._

COLCHESTER.


971.--_Saturday, October 2, 1858._

THE COMET will appear very bright, on Saturday. Look out at
Remenham.--Briggs.


972.--_Monday, October 4, 1858._

G. P-- N-- G-- N--. Mandami il tuo indirizzo, avrò forse bisogno di
scriverti. Qualora tu foste ricercato del piccolo B. O. M. ti avverto
che coloro che lo Chiedono non sono antorizzati, ne dalla famiglia sua
ne dalla madre, e però tu non sei obbligato a dire dove stà.--H.


973.--_Thursday, October 7, 1858._

DECIMALS to CHEOPS.--I have lost my money and my child. You can guess my
feelings. Can a lawyer advise a criminal act without rendering himself
equally liable? Answer to E. J. Wilson, Ennis, Ireland.


974.--_Thursday, October 7, 1858._

VIOLET--3 which greatly comforted me. I rate your good taste too high
and the individual too low to cause any uneasiness. Would a letter as
last be safe? Is our kind friend as well disposed towards me as ever? It
would please me much to know this. Well in health, but low in spirits. I
was a little uneasy, but am no longer so.--Lochinvar.


975.--_Thursday, October 21, 1858._

BLUE BELL.--Two.--I am deeply grateful, and much happier for the
knowledge of * * * * *’s continued kindness and good opinion. You can
communicate all except the actual means to her. I do not doubt ----
trustworthiness, but a look or a gesture might unwittingly betray, and
invoke consequences which would be frightful. Well. Again in a few days.
I have so much to say, the loss of the expected means is miserable,
though not unexpected.--L.


976.--_Tuesday, November 2, 1858._

AU CONTRAIRE, long expected Y O M is not such an uncertain bird that
some indications of his flight would not be observable. Have more
confidence.


977.--_Tuesday, November 2, 1858._

CONSTANTIA.--One.--Your efforts cannot but meet my warmest approbation.
One of my dearest hopes was to have shared in this, but trust may help
to finish. . . . . .’s kindness, merits, and receives my warmest
gratitude--say this from me. Something may be made of the excursion you
name. Think, and I will also. The separation from B. B. is becoming
unendurable to L. Each day heavier than the last. A meeting must be
managed. Well. About 4th November.


978.--_Saturday, November 6, 1858._

SO BE IT, MARIE, God bless you! 10th and 11th if possible, which is
earlier than I said, if I am able to leave home. The trial is terrible.
You act nobly. You know some dates, please to use them. All’s well. Ever
your--.--Nov. 5.


979.--_Monday, November 8, 1858._

LAURA.--The choice rose has drooped this year--the petals will become
dry, but still retain the aroma--some of the branches are a little out
of cultivation--the stem is degenerating. The otto from the damask rose
will ever retain its fragrance--all extraneous perfumes nauseate. Thanks
for the liberal offer, which is gratefully declined. As before.


980.--_Tuesday, November 9, 1858._

CONSTANTIA.--Letters have been sent which have not come to your hands.
Write and say where one can be sent safely. You may depend on me.


981.--_Wednesday, November 10, 1858._

VIOLET.--Great caution is now necessary. L.’s movements are known.
Patience and faith. Well. In a few days. Your brother does not wish to
offend. London, Nov. 9, 1858.


982.--_Thursday, November 11, 1858._

STANDLYNCH, 1811, the Comet: Paris, E. Ct., 1858, the Comet!


983.--_Tuesday, November 16, 1858._

BLUE BELL.--Is anything wrong? It seems such a terrible time since I
heard. Pray write soon as can. The notice (C) on Tuesday was not mine--V
was. There is one kind friend who will do all he can to effect a
reconciliation if opportunity offers. I fancy kinder feelings exist
towards me than we think. Do write.--London, November 12, 1858.


984.--_Wednesday, November 17, 1858._

TWENTY-FIVE.--Ich grüsse dich recht herzlich, und denke nur an dich.


985.--_Friday, November 19, 1858._

J. S. deceased.--Brentford, C. A.--The Clue.--Bartholomew accepts. The
most binding legal engagement will be entered into. Write at once, as
last, to Furnival’s-inn, and appoint interview.


986.--_Saturday, November 20, 1858._

LILIAN.--It was not wrong. I had only been doubtful as to the reality.
Happiness is yet in store for you. Pray write again and send an
address.--C.


987.--_Thursday, November 25, 1858._

B. B.--Are you unwell, or what is amiss? Nothing since November 2--21
long days. Can any letters have miscarried? My confidence is unshaken,
but I fear some terrible calamity. Pray relieve my anxiety, you know how
fearful that must be.--LOCHINVAR.


988.--_Thursday, November 25, 1858._

LILIAN.--Forgive me.--I cannot leave you thus. I have much to say of
comfort and sympathy, and long for the opportunity. Your better feelings
will tell you that Rome is not the only refuge. I beg of you to let me
hear at all times when practicable, if the other is at present
impossible, and also to withdraw the expression that your determination
is irrevocable. You may, indeed, confide in me as in a dear friend or
brother. Take courage, and hope for brighter days.--C.


989.--_Tuesday, November 30, 1858._

VIOLET.--The notice T. C. T. on the 9th was mine. I have cause again to
repeat the same. Pray write and say where a letter can be sent to you
safely. You know my address. Depend on me.--November 26.


990.--_Friday, December 3, 1858._

FAITH.--You have made me supremely happy. I do rely, and have perfect
confidence. You were grossly deceived. Entirely powerless for harm. I
accede to everything. Residence is changed. Address as in January. God
bless you!


991.--_Tuesday, December 21, 1858._

DEAR MARIE.--“Thanks.” “All is well. Semper idem.” Cautious, but quite
unchanged by trials. All is quite safe. A gleam appears. The full day is
at hand. Your conduct is noble. Refer as I do thus. “God bless you. Ever
your own,--.”--Dec. 18.


992.--_Tuesday, December 21, 1858._

NEW YEAR’S DAY.--Remember your promise, its fulfilment would atone for
the past, and mitigate the future. I seek no impossible renewal--only my
own peace. Urge no commonplaces as to inexpediency, &c.--the heart
knoweth its own bitterness. You once confided a dark page of your life’s
history to me; can you not trust me now? I never betrayed you. Ignoring
“the days that are no more,” we may yet be friends. I hazard all.


993.--_Saturday, January 1, 1859._

THE FIRST INCOME, St. Clement’s.


994.--_Saturday, January 1, 1859._

T. K.--I have not yet fallen down the precipice, but still stand
trembling on its slippery brink. Alas, who can say that another year
will find me thus, now that I have lost your bright example and good
advice? Marianne.


995.--_Monday, January 10, 1859._

TO CONTRE-COUP.--I am puzzled what to do with my daughter when I get
her. I had the guarantee of a London schoolmistress of 23 years’
standing, and yet she was not safe. You know what happened to my money
and papers in the heart of the city of London. I want your advice
respecting my salary here; I must be cautious, as you know what happened
to me at Greenwich for daring to speak my mind. Address E. J. Wilson,
Ennis, Ireland.


996.--_Tuesday, January 11, 1859._

JAN. 6.--Dear A. S.--Receive the full expressions of my zeal ever. Your
conduct is noble and constant. I am the same, unbent even by ----,
inflexible like you. “All’s well.” Thus point and refer. Yours ever, M.


997.--_Friday, January 14, 1859._

TO HER WHO CAN UNDERSTAND.--Let the flower not droop. It must know that
the other flower does sympathize with it. A reply sent to your lines was
by some mistake not duly inserted. There will be no delay now, and all
may yet be right.


998.--_Tuesday, January 18, 1859._

DIENSTAG WAHL.--Nachmittags für sie. Lassen sie mich sie sehen?


999.--_Tuesday, February 1, 1859._

O. T. E.--Du muss nur einmal wieder schreiben--die letzte zeit. Denke an
dein versprechen; zwei Jahren zu warten, und dann oder wenn du willst
komme. Mein herz ist gestorben, &c.


1000.--_Tuesday, February 1, 1859._

CLOVES.--Thus to address you without having heard a word! I have tried
in vain to get news. My fears have been, are still, of the most painful,
even dreadful, kind. God grant they may soon be dispelled. He has, I
trust, supported you through all. I have been much tried, and have
written for my own relief, but would send all if I could. Many things
have forced themselves upon me, spite of my distress. Improvements
everywhere, only worth to me for their obvious bearing on the one object
I really live for. From the past let us gather strength and hope. I
trust nothing in what I sent has disturbed you. God bless you; be
true.--Clarence.


1001.--_Monday, February 7, 1859._

TO CONTRE-COUP.--To terminate this disgraceful business, I had made
arrangements to place my daughter at school, at Boxmoor, Herts, but I
cannot get her. Now, what am I to do? The money I relied on in my old
age has been alienated--my child lost for ever--myself in the most
miserable part of the land of misery, with a miserable salary. Write and
address E. J. Wilson, Ennis, Ireland.


1002.--_Tuesday, February 8, 1859._

TWO THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED POUNDS--North-street.


1003.--_Tuesday, February 8, 1859._

ERNEST.--Je t’en prie m’envoyer les renseignements accueillis à Cologne,
Bonne, et Dusseldorff. Le paquet chiffré J. T. Le dénouement s’avance.
L’avocat est certain de son affaire.--Ça Va Venire.


1004.--_Thursday, February 10, 1859._

THE BEAR has COME to TOWN.


1005.--_Saturday, February 12, 1859._

ROSE-COLOURED Spectacles. Look through them if you would learn the
truth.


1006.--_Monday, February 14, 1859._

TO CONTRE-COUP.--My last advertisement to you arrived here yesterday,
and I lost two pupils the same day. Oh, Boxmoor! Boxmoor! (vous
comprendrez). The author of the decimal system at Her Majesty’s Customs,
which pours pure gold every day into the coffers of the nation, earning
a miserable subsistence in the worst part of Paddy’s land! “Aux hommes
capables la patrie méconnaissante.” Address E. J. Wilson, Ennis,
Ireland.--Feb. 10.


1007.--_Tuesday, February 15, 1859._

DIENSTAG WAHL. Keine andere.


1008.--_Tuesday, February 15, 1859._

TRIBE.--Quiet, or by the Pyramids. The birds will be caught.--Ennis 12th
Feb.; Boxmoor, 20th Feb.


1009.--_Thursday, February 17, 1859._

ORION’S BOAT.--R. proven beyond doubt. D. not yet. E. January 3.
Reference G. No compromise. Soon.


1010.--_Friday, February 18, 1859._

C. Y.--O pietosa colei, che mi soccorse. Household woes.--E. F. Cooke,
St. James’s Parsonage. Bethnal-green.


1011.--_Monday, February 21, 1859._

WA. A mother M. SC. H. Vox humanitatis. HL. A trifle. A servant’s mite.
Dum spiro spero. For F. MS. HCH. A. S. Little Herbert. Sympathizer. AMS.
JDM. HD. MS. both WL. Non nobis nati JGR. GL. AW. Mrs. J. S. D.
Falkland-house. Household woes. E. F. Coke, St. James’ Parsonage,
Bethnal-green. “Quale i fioretti dal notturno gielo, Chinatile chiusi,
poi che ’l sol gl’ imbianca. Il drizzan tutti aperti in loro stelo.”


1012.--_Monday, March 7, 1859._

CLOVES.--Why this mysterious, most painful silence? Pray let me see you
soon.--T. T.


1013.--_Saturday, March 12, 1859._

CAUTION.--All persons assisting in secreting my daughter, ALICE JANE
WILSON, 10 years old, are liable to seven years’ imprisonment.--E. J.
Wilson, Ennis, Ireland.


1014.--_Tuesday, March 15, 1859._

VIOLET.--You may still rely. Yes, I will, on the 17th, weather
permitting; if not, on the 18th.


1015.--_Tuesday, March 15, 1859._

CLOVES.--Still silent! I am in great distress of mind about you. This
suspense is dreadful--let me not ask in vain for its removal.--CLARENCE.


1016.--_Tuesday, March 15, 1859._

TRIBE.--You are not to seize my child, even if you can find her. You
know how the detectives and police served me; but I intend to have my
rights like other men, or---- Vive la Reine.--E. J. WILSON, Ennis,
Ireland.


1017.--_Thursday, March 17, 1859._

ZOH MOT.--You are informed the second time that you are being duped and
deceived in the name of another. Keep away.


1018.--_Friday, March 18, 1859._

CLOVES.--I will agree to anything, if you will only let me write to you
at once. I have so much to say. This you must not refuse. God bless
you.--Clarence.


1019.--_Friday, March 18, 1859._

V.--I dare not believe in the coincidence--the happiness would be too
great--yet even you must allow it is very strange. The name cannot pass
my lips. “Her eyes are lode-stars, and her breath sweet air.” When last
I saw those other stars alone I was plunged in despair. Years have
elapsed since then, but the minutest incident is still ever fresh in my
memory.--15th March.--J.


1020.--_Tuesday, March 22, 1859._

THE WRITER of the ANONYMOUS LETTER, from London, is informed by Mr.
Wilson, Ennis, Ireland, that the money he relied on in his old age has
been alienated, both capital and interest, and he will have his daughter
sent him by the Limerick steamer.


1021.--_Saturday, March 26, 1859._

TO HER WHO UNDERSTANDS.--It is difficult to believe you really unkind.
Pray point out your wishes, and I will do them. Nothing but misery since
the 15th ult. North for a few days; afterwards let me arrange with
you--if the old faith survives, you will not keep out of the way. Be
kind and reply to, Yours ever.


1022.--_Tuesday, April 5, 1859._

HER WHO DOES NOT QUITE UNDERSTAND wishes to do so. Not really unkind. If
on the 15th ult. the innocence was proved, why longer doubt? Come to my
home, and, if honourable, welcome. Duty has called, but not kept me
purposely out of the way. Yours sincerely.--April 4, 1859.


1023.--_Tuesday, April 12, 1859._

NICHT eine MILLION.--If an English school-mistress betrays the most
sacred trust a father can confide to her, there is no power in England
to right him. So, “Vive la Reine.”--E. J. WILSON, Ennis, April 9.


1024.--_Saturday, April 16, 1859._

TWO HUNDRED POUNDS REWARD.--Any person (except a detective or his agent)
restoring to me my daughter, ALICE JANE WILSON, 10 years old, shall
receive £200 reward.--E. J. WILSON, Ennis, Ireland.


1025.--_Thursday, April 21, 1859._

DURCH und durch verfault--Hundert Tausend G----n M----e (Ich
sch----sze--darauf) Das Gesetz giebt mir fünf Millionen. Durch und durch
verfault.--E. J. WILSON, Ennis, Ireland (Irlaad).


1026.--_Friday, April 22, 1859._

COCCAGEE.


1027.--_Saturday, April 23, 1859._

NICHT ZWEI MILLIONEN.--£10,000 sterling. (Bah!) In 1848, the
commencement of the Golden Age, I would not have changed prospects with
the proudest French merchant in London. Durch u durch verfault.--Ennis,
20th April.


1028.--_Wednesday, April 27, 1859._

CONSERVE TA SANTÉE.--Ma caisse des allumettes est un trésor
inappréciable, le feux qu’elle contienne rechauffe mon âme, me guide
dans le ténèbre, et remplace si non le soleil enfin, au moins le réflêt
de son éclat.


1029.--_Wednesday, April 27, 1859._

YOU must be very gentle. Je comprend votre sentiment en harmonie avec
mes plus chèrs désirs, mais je n’ose pas. Concernant mes nouvelles: ma
vie est très solitaire. P. était trois jours avec moi. J’espére M.
mieux. Je retourne O. P. H., pour revenir--Lundi.


1030.--_Thursday, April 28, 1859._

DOUBLE-FIN to CONTRE-COUP.--£10,000 sterling. Bah! I claim £250,000 on
eggs alone, to say nothing of that costly national antique (Long R.
Joey), and on decimals £100,000. Je saurai bien faire valoir (mes
droits).--E. J. WILSON, Ennis, Ireland.


1031.--_Wednesday, May 4, 1859._

ORION’S BOAT. Ready, aye, ready. No more wavering. Thorough.


1032.--_Friday, May 6, 1859._

FAITH.--Thanks. The present news does not accord very well with the
protestations so loudly made by him. It is, however, just as I
anticipated. It matters not, poor creature, he is quite harmless. All is
unchanged. Pray write sooner. Ever.


1033.--_Saturday, May 7, 1859._

DOUBLE-FIN to CONTRE-COUP.--Down upon lovely Apollo. £30 per annum out
of his own pocket. Those who don’t pay in money, pay in person. Address
me, E. J. Wilson, Ennis, Ireland.


1034.--_Monday, May 9, 1859._

TO B. C. Z.--You don’t know their antecedents (rouge et noir). I have
never seen any of my money from the day I nobly signed it away; and I
did not see my child for five years, and yet I respected the laws of
humanity; and you see the return--I have lost my daughter a second
time.--Ennis, 5th May.


1035.--_Wednesday, May 11, 1859._

EL CUYDS e TOPSIE.--Hopagato il due, sessanta. T. non le sapare, solo io
e, due zü. Mi scrivi se vivende per T e male--le vostre Compasses.


1036.--_Thursday, May 12, 1859._

B.--If not foolish, I may have been unscrupulous. He who has been
publicly insulted has a right to require a public apology. Your note is
sufficient. Read your Bible, and forget me. A. The last.


1037.--_Friday, May 13, 1859._

ROBERT.--Zkb gr brx frw frph ru zulwh iru ph? Vxfk julhi dqg dgal
hub;--Rk! Oryh. Oryh.


1038.--_Friday, May 13, 1859._

RAMADA ALTA. Onde está minha minina? Diga me ja.--ALICE.


1039.--_Monday, May 16, 24, 26, June 4, 1859._

AUSTRALIA.--EMY, WRITE.--TOBY.


1040.--_Monday, May 16, 1859._

BATTLEDORE to SHUTTLECOCK.--You can have no idea of the ordeal I have
had to pass through here, but I stop. I am firmly persuaded there is a
secret here, and one well worth knowing. I am sure of the rest. So
address me, E. J. WILSON, Ennis, Ireland.


1041.--_Thursday, June 2, 1859._

AH, bravo--ouvre tombeau--vent absolument vous voir. Ecrivez de suite.


1042.--_Saturday, June 4, 1859._

TO B. C. Z.--I have tried those gentleman-like and legal ways
recommended me by honest John Bull in anonymous letters, but there is no
chance of getting my child that way; so “vivent les imprimeurs.” Address
E. J. Wilson, Ireland.


1043.--_Saturday, June 4, 1859._

LORELEY.--Keep Bulls for the present. Weed out others at pleasure. No
tidings of lost sheep. Mr. T. has destroyed nothing. 98 safe. Alas! poor
Mercury. Jun. and Ce. will be of great use against the Marsites. All
well.


1044.--_Tuesday, June 14, 15, 16, 1859._

II: Don GIOVANNI : : 24 : x.--Pourrai-je jamais résoudre ce problème?


1045.--_Wednesday, June 15, 1859._

AH BRAVO! Ouvre tombeau. Une autre fois ne joues pas avec un cœur trop
sensible. Tu as déchiré le mien. Dès a présent je suis perdu. La victime
c’est moi. Je te pardonne. Que Dieu te bénisse.


1046.--_Friday, July 1, 1859._

FAITH.--It grieved me to hear that you did not see it. Although
accidentally misplaced, it was still there, and I hoped you would find
it. That which you suggest as a reason for its absence can never happen.
Think of it no more, as it is utterly and intirely impossible. I am not
surprised at the last news. Confidence. Time flies. Ever.


1047.--_Wednesday, July 6, 1859._

AH BRAVO! Ouvre tombeau! Si tu as la moindre compassion dans ton âme,
écris, ou viens me voir avant mon départ. C’est mon dernier appel;
écoutes-le, il est sacré. Ecris.


1048.--_Thursday, July 7, 1859._

KING’S-ROAD.


1049.--_Monday, July 11, 1859._

MY dearest ALICE.--I have not received any communication from you for 18
months. Oh! if you knew what persecution your poor Father has had to
undergo to try to deprive him of you for ever. Address me, Mr. E. J.
WILSON, Ennis, Ireland.


1050.--_Tuesday, July 12, 1854._

AH, bravo! Ouvre tombeau! Vous trouverez une lettre au même post-office,
où tu m’en as adressé plusieurs l’année passée, sous le nom de X. Allez
la chercher et tu ne dira plus que je te persécute.


1051.--_Friday, August 5, 1859._

FAITH.--It appears a long time since the last news was received; has
anything unusual transpired in the interim? I trust you saw the last.
All is well, and the ultimate result is certain, secure, and
satisfactory. Never doubt this.--Ever.


1052.--_Friday, August 5, 1859._

TOO vague, and like all else too public. May be ere you get this, and
may not be till morning of 7th, 12 o’clock. Do not go out of the house
till then. If you call on the strangers or converse with them anywhere,
I withdraw. In case you meet them, and miss me, do not go out.


1053.--_Monday, August 15, 1859._

ORION’S BOAT. Paratus.--G. and E.


1054.--_Tuesday, August 16, 1859._

I UNDERSTAND.--CEASE.


1055.--_Tuesday, August 16, 1859._

THE HOUSE.--He will never return where suggested by letter, dated 17th
July. Pursuit continued without intermission. Firmness and perseverance
are well known after seven years. The last request will be scrupulously
complied with. Has such treatment been merited?


1056.--_Wednesday, August 17, 1859._

V.--I felt assured there was an error of identity. How could such an
injunction apply when I had previously done so and no notice taken of
it? For this reason I did not pursue the answer. Stranger coincidences
have appeared since then. For myself, I can only say, there is no
change. The impression at times seems overcome, but continually
returns.--J.--16th August.


1057.--_Friday, September 2, 1859._

EPSOM.--Friends may desert, but I can never change. Hope still lingers,
but despair approaches. When that arrives you will know happiness no
more. Am I truly spoken of? In sincerity, ever yours.


1058.--_Friday, September 2, 1859._

FAITH.--The last news eminently satisfactory. The change spoken of
accords fully with the expectations formed. Rest assured that all is as
well as possible, arrangements are perfected, and every contingency
prepared for. Away and returned. Address as usual. It is mine. Ever.


1059.--_Saturday, September 3, 1859._

TO G.--“Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.”--2 Cor., IV.
c., 9 v. T. “write” home.


1060.--_Monday, September 5, 1859._

OUR PEOPLE RETURN September 7.


1061.--_Tuesday, September 6, 1859._

T. W. S.--Il me faut un cœur où je puisse répandre ma peine. Ecris-moi.
À toi à jamais, O. W. D.


1062.--_Friday, September 9, 1859._

TO the HEART of STONE.--Why torture the victim longer? Bright prospects
shine if you meet on the instant. He has been ruined over and over in
screening you. It is the last attempt. If you oppose him now, a few days
will put it out of his power to do all he desires for you--this is more
than can be told. He forgives from his heart, and will never allude to
the past. If he has offended, he hopes, alas, to be forgiven. Let him
see the child and kiss it. The nurse shall bear the note fixing time and
place. Let it be where you now are.


1063.--_Saturday, September 10, 1859._

TO EPSOM.--You are not truly spoken of. When I see you, I will consult
with you as to the best way to set matters right. Molehills have been
made mountains. I have so much confidence in you I shall never speak or
think of the past. Poison against you has been industriously strewed in
my path. Forgive. Watch for me at noon. Continue in sight, then I will
advance, not otherwise. I know myself too well to intrude. All as you
will.


1064.--_Monday, September 12, 1859._

EXCELSIOR.


1065.--_Thursday, September 15, 1859._

EPSOM.--“The Times,” 13th and 14th September instant. On the 13th
three--on the 14th two. This is the 19th since----. You can write--I
cannot. Your writing will show sincerity, and that the communication was
your own.


1066.--_Thursday, September 15, 1859._

EPSOM AGAIN.--I hope you are not labouring under the impression that, by
advising as I did, I am changed.--God forbid! Was “My dearest Friend”
yours, or is it a mere coincidence? I hope your h----’s fears are
groundless.


1067.--_Saturday, September 17, 1859._

MYSTERY.--Present conduct very suspicious to him who knows all. It
indicates, also, desire to delude, and exhibits all the past professions
to have been for some purpose. Meet as ordinary friends where you now
are, or never in this world. No more “delusion.” No more notes such as
“I have been much annoyed,” &c. The Martyr can no longer endure such
ungenerous petty insult. It out-Herods all. You shall have justice done
you so far as unfounded reports go, but the spirits of departed parents
and some respect for self as a man demand that I no longer rest under
the false accusations of the ----. Farewell.


1068.--_Thursday, September 22, 1859._

TWENTY-FIVE.--Près de toi c’est la vie, loin de toi c’est mourir.
Attendre et espérer je t’en conjure.


1069.--_Thursday, September 29, 1859._

WALES.--“RETURN or WRITE immediately.” This done over and over, but all
rejected. “All parties immovable.” These absurd words make me doubt
“sincerity.” “Very nervous.” Why so? I will never allude to the past,
nor think of it. I forgive all, whatever may have been. Ever study
wishes. Sent for letters in real name. Never yet a line. Fear not
threats. No future tales, whether true or groundless, will annoy me.
Your father and mother are better.


1070.--_Friday, September 30, 1859._

ROMANS XII. 9.


1071.--_Monday, October 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 1859._

TO -- ----.--Can’t you recognize a quotation from your own letter? I
often think “of that pretty but affecting tale of,” &c. No, not to the
last address, but the previous one.


1072.--_Monday, October 3, 1859._

V.--Près de toi c’est la vie, loin de toi c’est mourir. Most strange to
read one’s own inmost thought and yearning thus syllabled forth by
another, like a dream told back to the dreamer! Daily and hourly I
repeat to myself those words: but alas! for me, la vie court vite, c’est
la mort qui dure, et j’attends sans espérer.--J.


1073.--_Saturday, October 8, 1859._

K---- POTT. Sploce. Lak. The Mutability!


1074.--_Friday, October 28, 31, 1859._

MARIA.--Dear Wife. I am well. “Good night.” “All’s well.”--EDWARD.


1075.--_Friday, November 4, 1859._

MARIA.--That is done; give me a name, and I will write to the old
address. “Good night; all’s well.”--EDWARD.


1076.--_Monday, November 7, 1859._

MARIA.--It is done. Give me a name. I will write to the old address. I
am well, dearest. “Good night, all’s well. Ever yours, EDWARD.


1077.--_Tuesday, November 8, 1859._

HAND OBLIVISCENDUM.--Acknowledged £20.--4th Nov., 1859.


1078.--_Friday, November 11, 1859._

MARIA.--You have done most wisely. Always do the same. “Good night,
all’s well.” Yours ever, EDWARD.


1079.--_Monday, November 21, 1859._

MARY.--Is it safe to write to you, and to direct as I did the last?
“Good night, all’s well.” Your ever affectionate Husband.


1080.--_Monday, November 28, 1859._

LIVERPOOL.--Why not? ill, not Monday. Write.


1081.--_Friday, December 2, 1859._

FAITH.--The acquaintance is of the slightest, and conversation on such
matters is out of the question. The difficulties and evils are fully
understood. Does the P. S. concern the affair named some time back? Only
five. Ever.


1082.--_Monday, December 12, 1859._

AUSTRALIA: Emy: Write: Toby.


1083.--_Saturday, December 31, 1859._

TO “I AM GOING HOME.”--Give me your address. Confidence is felt. You
have not been avoided. Our business is settled at your pleasure. All
orphan’s difficulties can be dispelled if true friends rally round and
help with kind encouragement and explanation.--Dec. 30, 1859.


1084.--_Monday, January 5, 1860._

J. K.--Alas, no improvement since last year. I am still lingering on the
brink of the precipice, notwithstanding “Stick no Bills” and all the
kind advice which was then given. A happy new year to you.--MARIANNE.


1085.--_Thursday, January 26, 1860._

TOP of the HILL.--14.--Thank God! Wish to take leave of that growing 14.
It may turn saucy. But Patience shall be a duty.


1086.--_Tuesday, January 31, 1860._

EXOTIC.--This is final. I have suffered greatly, yet admire your
fidelity and strength of character. May you never repent it. Good-bye,
God bless you.--FRANK Dody.


1087.--_Wednesday, February 1, 1860._

ROSE LEAVES.


1088.--_Friday, February 3, 1860._

FAITH.--Ninety-nine instead of one hundred and fifty-two. A LETTER
AWAITS you as before. Ever.


1089.--_Friday, February 10, 1860._

EMERGENT.--F. D.


1090.--_Tuesday, February 14, 1860._

TO the INNOCENT.--Yes, on the instant. It cannot be after. Your manner
and ways, coupled with the truly absurd stories of the past, have made
you appear (to those not knowing you) other than you are. Would that all
the world was as amiable, virtuous, and good. Your FRIEND.


1091.--_Tuesday, February 28, 1860._

THE Lark they may prison, but her SPIRIT is risen, and soars to its own
native Skies.--WRITE, in strict confidence, to Reciprocal, care of X.
Y., 58, York-street, Dublin.


1092.--_Friday, March 2, 1860._

TOP OF THE HILL.--14th Anniversary.--I saw it. She suffers real want.
She must make another effort to move. The most trifling help is valuable
in such distress. She says that patience, faith, resignation, are sacred
duties.


1093.--_Wednesday, March 7, 1860._

GLEN.--SPECKLED FOWLS, buya--buy my mackerel!


1094.--_Thursday, March 15, 1860._

RENT.--RECEIVED YOURS; have long left town for my musical duties, the
salary for which hardly permits constant advertising; therefore you must
contrive how I can write to you. Your advice and convictions are equally
excellent; still the days of “manna” descending have ceased. Remember
advice regarding your health. Mr. Expert, ever your own fondly and
eternally, Sophy.


1095.--_Saturday, March 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 1860._

REFLECT!--Remember, I live still. Has been joyfully received. Where can
I meet you or write? God bless you.


1096.--_Saturday, April 21, 1860._

E. V. E. R. Y.--Not punishable.


1097.--_Wednesday, May 2, 1860._

NELLA bruna la costanza!


1098.--_Friday, May 18, 1860._

NINTH.--Would it be safe to do so? Great caution requisite.--Y----.


1099.--_Saturday, May 19, 1860._

WASHINGTON FRIEND APPROACHES LONDON.


1100.--_Thursday, May 24, 1860._

A. and E.--You do me an injustice to say that I am tampering with you.
Your kind notes were duly acknowledged. The first was destroyed
“unopened” (?). The second was returned. Though I may never have the
happiness of seeing you again the memory of the past will supply the
tide-flow of joy. Farewell.


1101.--_Friday, May 25, 1860._

PAIR the ARABIC NUMERALS; placing their like tens, for the Districts; in
the same line; and their like units, for the Guilds; in the same column.
By this chessboard arrangement, the hundred pairs will be sections of a
Phalanx, common to both.--T. F.


1102.--_Saturday, May 26, 1860._

A. and E.--You do me an injustice to say I am tampering with you. Your
kind notes were duly acknowledged. The first was destroyed “unopened.”
The other was returned. Vide the _Times_, May 24. N.B. These vowels “A.
E.” may be adopted by a third rival party for the purpose of misleading
through falsehood, but the true vowels “U. and I.” being relatives, will
not be deceived by capital letters or capital hoaxers. The wise accept
only as true evidence hand-writing, signature, and seal.


1103.--_Tuesday, June 5, 1860._

N. D.--Could not succeed on ----. You know ----. Hope better
fortune.--WRITE.


1104.--_Friday, July 20, 1860._

ELIZABETH STREET and every one. READ this COLUMN of yesterday.--F. M. S.


1105.--_Tuesday, July 31, 1860._

Αινιγμα.--How, without money, you can get steamers; and as many more
steamers you get, as more money you can possess?--X. to B. S.


1106.--_Thursday, August 2, 1860._

YOUR INITIALS in Hair.--J----. July 31.


1107.--_Wednesday, August 22, 1860._

HEW.--M. at S., much better. I have done very well. Made 65 this week.
Seconds for about 2,000. Hear again in two months.


1108.--_Saturday, September 1, 3, 1860._

ANTONIA.--Circumstances which appear adverse sometimes prove favourable,
and the faith I hold will not permit me to lose hope. Yours truly,
Annie.


1109.--_Tuesday, September 4, 1860._

THANKS.--I am, since Tuesday, in the W. C. B. H., and I shall, probably,
remain until you tell me to leave. I have been everywhere. One little
garden is the only one well looked after.


1110.--_Saturday, September 22, 1860._

ANNIE.--The excursion may not now extend to Geneva or Paris. Yours
faithfully, Antonia.


1111.--_Monday, September 24, 1860._

ADELINE.--Your happiness must be considered.


1112.--_Thursday, September 27, 1860._

J. A. W.--I cannot. Yes, I do very much. Thursday or Friday, at 4, at
old place.


1113.--_Thursday, September 27, 1860._

HORRID CREATURE.--Keep up your courage, and trust in God; He knows your
innocence, and will protect you. All your friends will be faithful till
death. Patience. Subteakhoojiaca.


1114.--_Friday, September 28, 1860._

X. Y. Z.--8 o’clock.--Portugal.


1115.--_Monday, October 1, 1860._

A LE VRAI CROIX.--I could not send before; fear I cannot again, but ever
believe I am “Fidèle à Mort.” Did you receive the picture?


1116.--_Tuesday, October 2, 1860._

TOIFEY, Toifey.--No letter as promised. Assert your rights. No white
slave. _Write._ I go S. W. on Wednesday, October 3--return to town on
Monday, October 22. Meet me that day. God bless you. Thine now as ever.
Despair. When the heart heaves. Return.


1117.--_Tuesday, October 2, 1860._

M. H. (Omega).--From justice and friendship you owe me some explanations
respecting the calumnies emanating from Newcastle, in order that I may
be enabled to defend myself in future against similar aspersions, though
(as a Christian) I may not be allowed to retaliate. Your letter shall be
answered immediately.--Kappa.


1118.--_Monday, October 8, 1860._

MAIBLUMCHEN, warum hast du nicht geschrieben? Es verlangt mich zehr
deinen zustanden zu wissen. Kanust du, mich au dem acht und zwanrigsten.
Monatstage zu treffen, mit mir verabreden?


1119.--_Wednesday, October 10, 1860._

TO M. A. A.--Ich habe gelebt und geliebt. Farewell?


1120.--_Thursday, October 11, 1860._

ISABEL.


1121.--_Monday, October 15, 16, 1860._

DEAREST BEIDES.--VISIT the BLACKMOOR at once, and all will be arranged,
and write to London Club. Mother very ill.


1122.--_Tuesday, October 16, 1860._

E----N.--I learn from Mrs. L., that you are the victim of a foul
conspiracy and gross delusions. I have ever been, am now, and mean under
any circumstances to continue, unchanged and faithful to 9th Nov., 1860.
Therefore the vacancy will not and cannot be filled up as you suppose.
Think of this in your moments of remorse. I found no letter with yours.
I shall not try to find or molest you; but let me write you more fully.
I wish you to be happy.--GRUNTLE.


1123.--_Wednesday, October 17, 1860._

BEIDES.--“Have a care.” You are near destruction, but still have
friends. Go to the Blackmoor at once, and a kind arrangement will be
effected.--E----


1124.--_Friday, October 19, 1860._

B. T.--You must come--it is your duty. G---- says so seriously. Extremes
all but meet.


1125.--_Monday, October 22, 1860._

CORRESPONDANCE.--Adressez-vous par billet au bureau convenu. Vous y
trouverez plusieurs Lancaster. Le bureau est ouvert depuis 10 jusqu’a 3.
Tout va bien.


1126.--_Tuesday, October 23, 25, 1860._

ADRESSEZ-VOUS, Great Winchester-street, city, vous en trouverez 5 au nom
convenu, le bureau est au rez-de-chaussée à gauche. Soyez tranquille
tout va bien.--Pervi, Luxembourg, 11.


1127.--_Thursday, October 25, 1860._

P. A. C. hopes now for mutual sympathy--time and thoughts work wonders.
A reply is asked, though hardly hoped for, saying that certain reports
(so quickly spread abroad after I left) might one day turn out truths.
The 25th prox. Ever yours.


1128.--_Monday, October 29, 1860._

ALPHA.--Does this vexation proceed from you or from his enemies who
employed similar means last May and June? If from you, you will please
to cease, or you may see him a few days hence a wanderer, once more, by
your fault. Though you imagine him changeable, God will strengthen him
not to swerve from the path of honour and conscience respecting M.
Z.--Kappa.


1129.--_Thursday, November 8, 1860._

R. E.--Tuesday, the 13th. Very great.


1130.--_Wednesday, November 14, 1860._

QUEEN of BUSHIRE.--Remember Ali Bux. WRITE at once. You know where.


1131.--_Tuesday, November 20, 1860._

HANG OUT the BANNERS.--COMMUNICATE all at once, if not too late. All may
be arranged. T. L. and T. A.


1132.--_Monday, November 26, 1860._

P. A. C. hopes that silence gives consent. Time and circumstance are the
keys to real sentiments. One word is asked in reciprocity, and anxiously
waited for. The 25th prox. Ever yours.


1133.--_Tuesday, November 27, 1860._

J. G.--Oui. Depuis le neuf. Parole. Violettes arrivées mille
remercimens. Souffrant et très occupé. Je t’embrasse.


1134.--_Saturday, December 1, 1860._

J.--RECEIVED ALL. Not before twenty-second. Will call. Doctor satisfied.
Trash. H. Read Hermine. Await opportunity to write.


1135.--_Thursday, December 6, 1860._

T. G.--Arrived all right, as arranged; M. O. D. W. Lovely country, but
no good cigars. I wish you could bring some. Pray write soon to Y. O. D.
H.--A. E. T.


1136.--_Tuesday, December 11, 12, 1860._

NENNEN Sie den Tag und den Platz: wenn Sie mich nicht sehen können in
Ihren Amt?


1137.--_Saturday, December 15, 1860._

DIDO.--All will be right if done at once.--WIDO WEE.


1138.--_Saturday, December 29, 1860._

L’AMI FENTON’S est parti le lundi seulement, je reste en ville. Je
t’embrasse.


1139.--_Tuesday, January 1, 1861._

T. G.--D. L. landed at Palermo, went through Sicily to Messina, up to
Naples and Capua; and now, with heart true to the cause, waits events at
F. Viva Italia! Quite well. Nothing new. How is D. W. all this time? Y.
O. D. H.--A. E. T.


1140.--_Thursday, January 10, 1861._

JD. . LC. . Well × J. H. D. . name in full length. High-street, Dorkg,
Surrey.


1141.--_Saturday, January 19, 1861._

QUEEN of BUSHIRE.--Care not for the Dragon. Poor Ali Bux still waits for
the waggon, at the old address.


1142.--_Tuesday, January 29, 1861._

WHAT you wish is done.--W---- No----.


1143.--_Friday, February 1, 1861._

ORION’S BOAT.--Renew, and make an end.


1144.--_Saturday, February 2, 1861._

SCROOGE has promised. Write to W.


1145.--_Saturday, February 2, 4, 1861._

TO QUOD TIBI ID ALII.--“Pray, dearest S., write.” Veto X., to Tavistock,
London.


1146.--_Saturday, February 2, 1861._

T. G.--RETURN to Z., on the day appointed, M. O. D. W. You know when and
where, and that I am Y. S. H.--A. E. T.


1147.--_Saturday, February 2, 1861._

Αναγη.--I cannot thank you enough for keeping your promise. F. S. and
leaving in C., venture to B., completing their service. There is no
personal news, except that, through delay in receipt of letter from
consulate, I am unable to return and enter de T. How little you know of
that morning’s history--the intense effort required not to involve some
one very dear--it would have been ruinous; and yet how much I would risk
if necessary--I do not, I shall not, forget. Reconsider what are
circumstances to a will like yours! Pray WRITE, if only once
more.--Yours ever, T.


1148.--_Wednesday, February 6, 1861._

NEVER.


1149.--_Wednesday, February 6, 1861._

ADIEU. God bless you! Farewell.


1150.--_Saturday, February 9, 1861._

T. D.--L. C. well. T. H. D., name in full length.--High-street, Dorking,
Surrey.


1151.--_Saturday, February 9, 1861._

THE TIMES, May 9, 1859.--“Hope, ever hope.” I have and will always do
so; yet I have had no intelligence of you since May 24, ’59. Can you not
let me hear from you, directly or indirectly? I trust that when Spring
returns (the flower it blooms) that friends so sincere will meet again.


1152.--_Friday, February 15, 1861._

E. to B---- O.--The cough is well. I wish to see you. What we arranged.
They would not pub Lupus.


1153.--_Saturday, February 16, 1861._

HOPE, ever hope. I have, and will always do so; yet I have had no
intelligence of you since May 24, 1859. Will you let me know how you can
hear from me, as I do not know your address? You can have mine from Mrs.
Turner, 26, Brewer-street, Pimlico; then friends so sincere will meet
again.


1154.--_Thursday, February 21, 1861._

LOOK HERE--remember next Tuesday.


1155.--_Thursday, February 21, 1861._

X. Y. Z.--Yes. Good news this morning. I did not advertise on Tuesday.


1156.--_Friday, February 22, 1861._

TODD oder TODT? Schreibe--welcher, dem “Carbonari.”--Exchange, Dundee.


1157.--_Thursday, February 28, 1861._

JACK has LOST VICTORIA TRAIN. Wishes to explain to F. this delay. Fix a
time.


1158.--_Thursday, February 28, 1861._

FIFTEEN POUNDS RETRIBUTION RECEIVED, S. S. Matt. vi. 15. When? where?
and, if myself personally or others of the family who have been wronged?
Initials, and I’ll seek no more. Address, General P. O., Clapham.


1159.--_Friday, March 1, April 1, 1861._

Αναγη.--I cannot thank you enough for keeping your promise. F. S. and
leaving in C., return to B., completing their service. There is no
personal news, except that, through delay in receipt of letter from
consulate, I am unable to return and enter de T. How little you know of
that morning’s history--the intense effort required not to involve some
one very dear--it would have been ruinous; and yet how much I would risk
if necessary--I do not, shall not forget. Reconsider what are
circumstances to a will like yours! Pray WRITE, if only once more.
January 15.--I have just seen an obituary notice--how sad, sudden,
unexpected! How much I wish I could be of some service to you!--Your
ever, T.


1160.--_Friday, March 15, 1861._

A. B. C.--This is the first time. The value and importance of the
matters in question are overestimated, but act justly. The name (three
words) appears several times.


1161.--_Thursday, March 28, 1861._

STOOPUMS.--Shall be in town on Friday, leave on Sunday. WRITE to old
lodgings what time “Pomp” on Saturday must see you. IDIOT.


1162.--_Friday, March 29, 1861._

STOOPUMS.--There is a letter at old place. Send for it. Forgot this
yesterday. IDIOT.


1163.--_Monday, April 1, 1861._

HAMPSTEAD HEATH ENCLOSURE.--Something’s up!


1164.--_Wednesday, April 3, 1861._

ORION’S BOAT.--Come with all papers (H. C.) Missing memorandum of E. &
G., former year, found.


1165.--_Thursday, April 4, 1861._

TO VIOLET.--Keep up your heart. Trust in me. I have seen your Friend,
and will do all for the best. You are, and always will be, my first
thought. I have now received three letters from you, viz.;--13th
February, 1st and 28th March: and have done all you wished. No. 2.


1166.--_Monday, April 8, 1861._

JOLLY to RUMMY.--Please give me a right understanding, as I am in a fix,
and I will answer you in return.


1167.--_Monday, April 22, 1861._

ALL RIGHT, my own darling E.--April 16.


1168.--_Wednesday, May 1, 1861._

ORION’S BOAT.--No writing. I will see you.


1169.--_Wednesday, May 1, 1861._

TO the ONE WHO CAN UNDERSTAND.--You cannot, I am sure, now fail in your
promise voluntarily given. I pray you to let this painful suspense end,
and accounts come as before. R. has returned to remain. Let this appeal
be sufficient.


1170.--_Wednesday, May 8, 1861._

TOM CAT.--A Boy on the 2nd May, in Paris.--Pray write to B., who is now
free! He waits to tell you all. Direct under cover to J. R. S. You may
safely write.


1171.--_Thursday, May 9, 1861._

BEAULIEU.--Received.--Ps. xx., 3, 4.


1172.--_Wednesday, May 22, 1861._

TOM CAT.--Another letter has been SENT to Bruxelles, poste restante. An
interview in pure and sincere friendship is all that is asked, at any
time and place you may name. Do not delay, it is of vital importance to
me, and much so to you. Depend upon your own wishes being carried
out.--B.


1173.--_Monday, May 27, 1861._

ORION’S BOAT.--Wait for me. E. Y. 2. You mistook.


1174.--_Tuesday, May 28, 1861._

R. S. P., Water Colourer.


1175.--_Saturday, June 1, 1861._

A FAINT HEART NEVER WINS a FAIR LADY. The ANONYMOUS CORRESPONDENT whose
letter was posted in Lombard Street, on Thursday last, is requested to
be MORE EXPLICIT. R. sticks to his craft, and will persevere when he
sees his way. Address, Post-office, Vigo-street, Regent-street.


1176.--_Tuesday, June 11, 1861._

BRIDGEWATER.--I am horrified at what I have discovered. If possible let
me know the worst.


1177.--_Tuesday, June 18, 19, 1861._

HONEYCOMB.--Please “journey” home end next week. WRITE immediately,
sending address. You have not been kind to IDIOT.


1178.--_Tuesday, June 18, 1861._

FELIX.--138 and special, right. T. leaves home July 3. Congratulate Ce.
on late successful performance. Proposed plan approved, but come sooner
if possible. Remember us to Scrup & Co. All well, and unite in regards.
Addio.


1179.--_Thursday, June 20, 1861._

SMUDE.--Sah nettirw eciwt. Syats ta sih ecffio rof eht tneserp.--June
19.


1180.--_Friday, June 21, 24, 26, 1861._

PORTMANTEAU to PACK. I still dream.


1181.--_Thursday, June 27, 1861._

A. B. Z. si yltsenrae detseuqer ot etacinummoc tuohtiw yaled. Ma ni yrev
taerg elbuort. Dna eriuqer etaidemmi ecivda.--53, Reppu Ruomyes-teerts,
Namtrop-erauqs.


1182.--_Monday, July 1, 2, 1861._

CHAPEL of EASE.--NELLY.--He is delirious. He wishes to hear from you. We
fear the worst. You know the address. His friends have inserted this. A
line from you may save him yet.


1183.--_Friday, July 12, 1861._

SMUDE.--Eht tsop eciffo ta Hgiel si dehctaw. Lotsirb lliw od. Ekat
erac.--July 11.


1184.--_Friday, July 19, 1861._

J. B. and S. S. are quits.


1185.--_Tuesday, July 30, 1861._

W. H. D. Elsie. C. C. C. You are mistaken. This is my testimony. Yours,
as ever, for ever. Robert.


1186.--_Thursday, August 8, 9, 1861._

X. Y. Z.--August 12. 8 o’clock.--PORTUGAL.


1187.--_Thursday, August 8, 1861._

GIOIA MIA.--Pipey and Beauty quite well. Cases paid for. Sorry to
disappoint you, but too uncertain. Letter by first opportunity. Thank
J., to whom I could write? A toi corps et âme.


1188.--_Wednesday, August 14, 1861._

TOM MOORE, No. 1. RECEIVED yours. You write, I will do as you propose.


1189.--_Wednesday, August 21, 1861._

TOM MOORE.--I shall not leave London unless with you. Your letters give
hopes (No. 2).


1190.--_Thursday, August 22, 1861._

STELLA.--Aan, Bala, Na Bud, Ke Ay, Bala, Bud. There is a LETTER for
you.--C. Y.--35, Post-office, G----W.


1191.--_Saturday, August 31, 1861._

TOM MOORE.--YOURS RECEIVED. Thanks. How is T.’s health? Polly’s visit
was a great kindness, and it has allayed a very anxious feeling. B. is a
bachelor (No. 3).


1192.--_Tuesday, September 3, 1861._

TOM MOORE.--B. will be there (4).


1193.--_Tuesday, September 3, 1861._

BLUE ENAMEL CROSS.--I cannot trust W. Letter received. I accept all its
terms. Mine until death. Be patient.


1194.--_Wednesday, September 4, 1861._

L’ESCORT RECEIVED YOURS. However well himself complains of the conduct
of your protégée. He gives him great trouble, and unless you could give
hope for an early “Duncaster” meeting he fears the necessity of applying
for help to Dr. Evans. Having no project he shall not leave S. before
the 15th September.--Scarborough, Sept. 1.


1195.--_Friday, September 6, 1861._

LORELEI.--The Anthropophagous didn’t gobble the partridges.


1196.--_Tuesday, September 10, 1861._

S. to L., the 8 R’s, and W.--CHARLES URQUHARDT NEWPORT TINLEY has not
suffered from the eels.


1197.--_Saturday, September 14, 1861._

TOM MOORE--Yours received. Six months is quite right. I think B. had
better see you next week; but if you think otherwise, a small parcel,
containing the writing, shall be left at the Rail, you to call for it as
you pass (5).


1198.--_Tuesday, September 17, 20, 24, 1861._

N. W.--L’Amaro è Molto. Helurchen.


1199.--_Tuesday, September 17, 1861._

TOM MOORE.--B. travels upon the second day named, unless you advise
differently by post. B. can arrange the day to your advice (6).


1200.--_Thursday, September 19, 1861._

WILL you GIVE me a BOA at Brighton. Norwood Junction, 10.30 P.M. Shall
we never meet again? The word to Nina, Post-office, Norwood. S. marked
“M. T.” may reach and console the stranger.


1201.--_Tuesday, September 24, 1861._

C. C. C. I must see you. This place is not what I expected (Plants). I
have a rival (foreign) earning double as much as I do. You heard what
happened to my money and papers in the city. E. W., B’ps Std.,
Herts.--X.


1202.--_Wednesday, September 25, 1861._

TOM MOORE.--INSTRUCTIONS will be WAITING you at the Railway Station, the
Parcel office, when this meets your eye. Still hoping (7).


1203.--_Thursday, September 26, 1861._

TOM MOORE.--You are favoured in your powers, so do persist and
persevere, but judiciously, and the difficulty, we hope, will then
yield, though at a late moment. Most seriously avoid the
alternative--the sacrifice is too great. B. is engaged on Saturday (8).


1204.--_Saturday, September 28, 1861._

TOM MOORE.--This day’s post gives great hopes, is quite encouraging. You
arrange in every way as you deem most prudent. We begin to anticipate
the results of your almost certain success (9).


1205.--_Wednesday, October 2, 1861._

SERPENT--Dove.--Bedford.--Geranium.--Just RECEIVED, FIRST SIGNAL,
unknown to the rest. Write it me, and let me answer you. Quite right so
far. Annie, dear, good-night.--M. T. South Norwood--Glove--size.


1206.--_Tuesday, October 8, 1861._

G. P. L.--Virtue, honour, perseverance, will bring elevation and
deserts, and, it is hoped, forgiveness.--GRIEF.


1207.--_Tuesday, October 8, 1861._

UNCLE TOM.--If you have not already written, pray WRITE, as there is
very much anxiety. You may see B. any day, from 2 till 4, and later if
requisite (1).


1208.--_Thursday, October 10, 1861._

BELLA, St. Mary’s, must see G. H., or hear from them immediately.
Something must be settled before the winter. Bad season. Ill health.
What was suggested will be the best plan to adopt. Make an advance, it
is an effort, but will eventually prove the best for all. Parties
surrounded by enemies. Don’t hesitate. Inevitable ruin is the result.


1209.--_Friday, October 11, 1861._

INFELIX.--Notice of your return vainly expected. Ire. to H. V. 11th,
Spring 15th and Home 18th, unless----. Send your plans directly chez
moi. O. will forward them. Birdie much wanted. Work nearly done.
Esperanza. Addio. Yours, T.


1210.--_Thursday, October 17, 1861._

UNCLE TOM.--Yes, received. We are well. For you we are painfully
anxious. Your happiness is inseparable from our own. Spare nothing to
obtain the one result so important to your future. B. will let you have
anything you require to ensure that. He longs to see you here or there.
Is anything settled in regard to the holydays? Think of the
commencement of this month (2).


1211.--_Monday, November 11, 1861._

PERCY.--Was it not abominable of you? Poor M. was greatly disappointed.
Pity her a little.


1212.--_Wednesday, November 13, 1861._

MAIBLUMCHEN, schriebe du sogleich das du dies gesehen habest, will ich
wie gewohnlich einen Brief schreiben.


1213.--_Wednesday, November 20, 1861._

XMAS.--Happy birthday.


1214.--_Wednesday, November 20, 1861._

EVANGELIST.--Rightly done.--M. O. M.


1215.--_Thursday, November 21, 1861._

WITH remorse and misery beyond telling, I find myself alone. Be
merciful! Pray let me send what money you want, it would be the greatest
consolation. God bless!--C. . .


1216.--_Friday, November 22, 23, 1861._

LITTLE SILLY.--Under cover to my Agent.


1217.--_Monday, November 25, 1861._

KLEPTOMANIA’S silly COMMUNICATION RECEIVED.


1218.--_Monday, November 25, 1861._

GIOIA MIA.--Do not prejudge me. Wait for my letter. I was mad, ma
fidèle. A thousand thanks for all. Je suis bien triste.


1219.--_Tuesday, December 3, 5, 7, 1861._

DEAR OLD MONSTER.--Little Ling is very unhappy. Horse is well.


1220.--_Thursday, December 5, 1861._

05100.--Moribond.--3rd Dec. 1861. Abruzzi, 13.--Hotel des
Ambassadeurs.--Ig. Pollaky.


1221.--_Saturday, December 7, 1861._

Y. Z.--To-day there has been “sunshine through the clouds.” I shall
call, as before, in case. ARGUS. December 6.


1222.--_Saturday, December 7, 1861._

MY dear HARRY.--Look at our old friend Jupiter, and have faith in your
kind old sister, LIZZY.


1223.--_Tuesday, December 10, 1861._

C. A. G.--Do not send any more till I see you. Fresher than ever. Quite
well. N. S.


1224.--_Tuesday, December 10, 1861._

05100.--Moribond.--Abruzzi, 9th December, 1861. Tempora mutantur, et nos
mutamur in illis. Ab uno disce omnes.--IGNATIUS POLLAKY.


1225.--_Thursday, December 12, 1861._

05100.--Moribond--Abruzzi.--11th December, 61.--Your COMMUNICATION
RECEIVED. The arguments entirely irrelevant to the point in
question.--IGNATIUS POLLAKY.


1226.--_Friday, December 13, 1861._

UNCLE TOM.--Pray WRITE. Is it impossible to get to B. this week? These
disappointments are very sad (3).


1227.--_Thursday, December 19, 1861._

INSOMUCH as ye have done it unto one of the least of these, my brethren,
ye have done it unto me. Thanks--thanks.


1228.--_Friday, January 3, 1862._

FAITH CROWNS ALL; seal Dec. 31, communication received from an “Old
Friend.” An interview or card of address requested. Address as the
last.--J. D.


1229.--_Wednesday, January 8, 1862._

CÆSAR J.--He is very unhappy at having pained others, and, in spite of
all appearances, is loyal and true. The pilgrim is sad and desolate, but
hopes not to be forgotten. Bless her and both children. Revda rof tuo
Kool.


1230.--_Wednesday, January 15, 1862._

0’503, Ad captandum vulgus.--She has arrived, but dangerously ill.
Forgive. You can have the necessary guarantees on applying to Mr.
Pollaky, Private Continental Inquiry-office, 14, George-street, Mansion
House.


1231.--_Tuesday, January 28, 1862._

CÆSAR J.--The absence and silence of his children cause much sorrow to
the pilgrim. He hopes to hear soon. The usual address. Bless them both.
He cannot change.


1232.--_Tuesday, January 28, 1862._

WATCHER.--Dismiss all doubts. No one can supply your place. Absence
strengthens the tie. I look so steadfastly to the future, and approve
all your plans.


1233.--_Wednesday, February 5, 1862._

S----L H----L.--I promise. The 3rd or 10th of March. One there now.--C.,
Feb. 3, 1862.


1234.--_Thursday, February 13, 1862._

OUR TERRACE.--My Beloved, I live only in the assurance of your truth and
love. Pray WRITE.


1235.--_Friday, February 14, 1862._

G. O. in D.--Very good for false premises. Try again, but let truth be
your guide. Dublin.


1236.--_Friday, February 14, 1862._

WATCHER.--All safe. WRITE, and send the letter. Do not be alarmed, as
the object of the writers must be to annoy or intimidate you for some
purpose of their own. Their malice here is quite harmless. Above all,
make no confidant, nor ask any advice. Be patient, and rely upon me. An
unexpected absence has caused this delay. For ever ----.


1237.--_Wednesday, February 26, 1862._

FRED.--All right. I sympathize with your pain, but why seek consolation
where you cannot find it, and in a way that pains me? WRITE as usual.
Trust ever.


1238.--_Saturday, March 8, 1862._

H. S. S.--RECEIVED your LETTER. Have twice advertised. Utterly useless
to accept an engagement. Not much success. Nearly four months. No
tidings from my friend. This is the worst trouble. Expenses very heavy.
Write soon.


1239.--_Thursday, March 13, 1862._

IT was once bare! Should he have taken it? Is the chance gone?--from
WATCHER.


1240.--_Friday, March 14, 1862._

WATCHER.--Your long silence has caused me much suffering. Are you ill? I
can hardly think so, as you promised to send for me. I anxiously await
some reply.


1241.--_Tuesday, March 25, 1862._

CÆSAR J.--The Pilgrim is much distressed at the long silence of his
children. Can they not let him hear through his family. When do they
return? He is unchanging. Is he forgotten?


1242.--_Wednesday, March 26, 1862._

FRED.--The dog has always been with me and is still. Save anxiety for
your health. I am very happy. Your hopes are mine, and I fervently say
amen to them. You are dearer than ever so close.


1243.--_Tuesday, April 1, 1862._

REVELATIONS.--19th chapter, 4th verse. England, Scotland, Wales, and
Ireland into 24 provinces--Genesis, 1st chapter, 27th verse--to each
province of districts, 0 to 9, and guilds 0 to 9, the companies 00 to
09, and 10 to 99, common to both.


1244.--_Tuesday, April 29, 1862._

TO R. N.--Wedding Cake. Spanish Knife. Awoke picking up tips of fingers.
Is it a sign of my fall from the height which I fain would climb?--H. C.


1245.--_Wednesday, May 7, 1862._

LIKE a SHIP WITHOUT a RUDDER, in apparent calm, she will SINK without
aid. Give some sign.


1246.--_Wednesday, May 7, 1862._

A. E. S.--I have not heard from you for a week, and have no idea where
you are. N’import--“Where ignorance is bliss,” etc., and Patti is really
charming. London, Tuesday.


1247.--_Friday, May 9, 1862._

W. W. S.--Zy epfdlj I dpye wpeepc ez mjcyp qzc jzf--xlj I daplv qfwwj zy
lww xleepcd le esp tyepcgtph? te xlj oz Rzzo ecfde ez xj wzgp--I lx
xtdpclmwp--hspy xlj I rz ez nlyepcmfcj tq zywj ez wzzv le jzf.--May 8.


1248.--_Monday, May 12, 1862._

W. W. S.--Sxhrdktg hdbtiwxjv “Imwxqxixde axyt” udg--. Pcdewtg
psktgexhtbtci.--Q N G C T.


1249.--_Tuesday, May 13, 1862._

T Y D E L D.--zq zzlyz ez nlyepcmfcj, I estyv jzf sld xfns mpiipc delj
le syxp lyd xtyd jzfc mfdtypdd.--W W S., May 10.


1250.--_Tuesday, May 13, 1862._

W. W. S.--Fyetw jzfc qlespc lydpcd I hzye ldv jzf ez aczgp jzf wzgp
xpepfdlj ytrse le yyp znwznv slgp l dectyr qczx esp htyozh qzc wpeeped
Iq jzf lcp yze lmwp le zyp I htww hlte. Rzo nzxqzce jzf xj olcwtyr htqp.


1251.--_Wednesday, May 14, 1862._

POUSSE.--RETURN at once. I have squared everything. The maternal has not
yet heard. The monoptic will kill the fatted calf. Another day the news
will have reached home. Come to dinner at 7 to-night.


1252.--_Friday, May 16, 1862._

THE NONCE’S DREAM.--RETURN, or you will kill your mother. No one yet
knows your absence, and I have squared everything. Write for any money
you want.--The Monoptic L, and the Artist.


1253.--_Monday, June 2, 1862._

FOUR.--Inadmissible, but all well in every way. Will meditate and think.
It can probably be done.--C. F.


1254.--_Thursday, June 12, 13, 14, 1862._

CHAFFINCH.--January Wife.--Must die unless you go at once home to Garden
of the Soul. No one will know. Besides M. can assure C. all can be made
right and forgiven.


1255.--_Thursday, July 3, 1862._

THREE. Your conduct is admirable. Wait. Events unfold themselves best.


1256.--_Wednesday, July 9, 1862._

IT is easy to find a brother, not so a kind friend.


1257.--_Monday, July 21, 1862._

Z. B.--Finis coronat opus. 15th July, 1862. Pollaky.


1258.--_Tuesday, July 22, 1862._

M. to G.--He has sneezed.--St. J.’s. July 20.


1259.--_Thursday, July 31, 1862._

PENCIL.--Should I take old R----g? Answer J. P. A. T. 7.7.7.7.


1260.--_Thursday, July 31, 1862._

INFELIX.--T. wants to communicate with Bird. Arrange with Ce and let me
know, through Springwell or direct, before the 7th, when T. leaves town
for Springs. N. & Co. go to B. S. shortly, I hear.


1261.--_Wednesday, August 13, 1862._

LONDON, Aug. 11, 1862. E.C. No. 226.


1262.--_Wednesday, August 20, 1862._

PRUSSIA, August 19.--All safe.--Robert Henry.


1263.--_Thursday, August 28, 1862._

BRUGES to Turk.--Who’s a hound? Write to town. T. G.


1264.--_Friday, August 29, 1862._

IDA.--Do not act as you propose. It would be madness, and could only end
in misery, worse than any you dream of. Be brave; our fate is much of
our own making. We send you our blessing.--The Pope.


1265.--_Friday, September 19, 1862._

C. S.--N----y--. Again, or good-bye, &c. E----r E., S.M.C.


1266.--_Saturday, September 20, 1862._

A. Z.--“La nuée a crevé sur nous.” J’erre tout seul dans le bois, mais
je te trouverai à la fin. Je sais à qui je me fie mille fois mieux que
ceux qui ont fait de si vains efforts pour ébranler la confiance que
j’ai en toi. Nous ne deviendrons que plus proche de Dieu et plus chers
l’un à l’autre par suite de toute cette douleur, et je te prie de
n’abandonner jamais ta FAITH.


1267.--_Thursday, September 25, 1862._

MINERVA.--What a pretty little seal!


1268.--_Thursday, September 25, 1862._

AZIM.--Remember your child’s first and last words. Are they not true?
MARIE.


1269.--_Thursday, September 25, 1862._

JE N’OUBLIERAI JAMAIS ta MÈRE.--Les liens invisibles sont les plus
sacrés. Soyez heureuse. Sept. 29, 1862. Ap. 28. N. 6, 13. Je n’écriverai
plus.


1270.--_Thursday, October 2, 1862._

A. Z.--Est-ce-que je te deplais en me rendant à ----? Je tâcherai à
m’absenter si tu le désires véritablement, mais il faut que tu m’en
avertise. Je ne crois pas à la rumeur; elle a dit de toi ce qui ne peut
pas être vrai. Quant à moi, crois seulement que j’ai toujours en toi une
confiance inébranlable, et que je garde religieusement ma parole.
Donne-moi tes prières, j’en ai besoin. Tu as toujours les miennes. Voir
The Times de samedi, le 20 septembre.--FAITH.


1271.--_Monday, October 6, 1862._

AMAZON.--P.O., Oxford.


1272.--_Tuesday, October 7, 1862._

A. Z.--Ma Faith ne peut me déplaire; elle est bien bonne de ne pas faire
attention à ces histoires; elle sait qu’on ne connait que trop bien
l’espérance de ma vie, et veut se venger en la détruisant; mais j’aime
ma Faith, et vienne que vienne je l’aimerai pour toujours. Allons donc,
pas plus de doutes, le bon Dieu bénira nos volontés, et tout ira bien à
la fin.


1273.--_Thursday, October 9, 1862._

SEMPER IDEM.--WRITE or COME, nothing doubting. June 1855. 1 Thess. chap.
11, verse 19.--FAITH.


1274.--_Friday, October 10, 1862._

GEORGE.--A fair start after a long walk. DO COME or WRITE, to relieve
this anxiety.


1275.--_Saturday, October 11, 1862._

JE n’oublierai jamais ta Mère.--Ap. 26, 27, 30, 1850. M. 4, 11. Les
liens invisible sont les plus sacrés--N. 6. 13. Les enfants me laissent
peu de loisir, jamais ne peut-on conter sur un jour de fête, toujours il
arrive quelque contretemps; mais, je ne suis pas malade, et, si Dieu
permet, j’espère me rendre à W. N. 2nd, passer le dimanche près de mon
vieux toit paternal. Je suis fâché qu’une lettre écrite (il y a quelques
semaines) dans une langue étrangère vous n’a pas trouvée, car je n’aime
pas ce mode d’entretien. Mon amitié ne changera jamais, mais je
n’écriverai plus de ce façon.--Ap. 28, N. 6, 13.


1276.--_Thursday, October 23, 1862._

HOPE.--The MISSING ONE is RECEIVED. Your two last darlings have done me
good, and I cannot but trust you. My feelings are more intense than
ever. Cast away those presentiments of evil that you tell me about, and
believe me unchanged. Write as often as you can. My wishes fly to unite
with yours.


1277.--_Monday, October 27, 1862._

OFT expectation fails, and most oft there Where most it promises; and
oft it hits, When hope is coldest, and despair most sits.


1278.--_Tuesday, October 28, 29, 30, 31, November 1, 6, 7, 1862._

SOMEBODY’S LUGGAGE.


1279.--_Wednesday, October 29, 1862._

X. EGGS. X.


1280.--_Wednesday, October 29, 1862._

AMAZON RECEIVED.


1281.--_Wednesday, October 27, 1862._

HOPE. I like your last very much. How can you doubt me ? I had written
to you, but the party you mention thought better of it, and declined to
forward it. I am dying to see you, that we may settle matters. I am
better than I was, and look forward to happier days.


1282.--_Thursday, October 30, 1862._

X. SILK X.


1283.--_Friday, October 31, 1862._

FIDES (Thought).--No myth, but a neighbouring town, where I shall be
detained a little time. I shall be in for a few hours on Monday, and
must take my chance of meeting you between 2 and 3 o’clock. Perhaps I
may hear from you meantime. Direct to P.O.


1284.--_Saturday, November 1, 1862._

M. A. Y.


1285.--_Saturday, November 1, 1862._

X. CAEN X.


1286.--_Tuesday, November 4, 1862._

X WIRTHSHAUS X--Key--X Eggs X--X Silk X--X Caen X (×. plus) X Wirthshaus
X = X Tour X.


1287.--_Tuesday, November 4, 1862._

A. Z.--Je me suis tenu éloigné de----à cause de toi. Ne juge pas mal de
mon absence. Les choses que l’on t’a ôté, je les garderai précieusement
jusqu’à ce que tu pourras les réclamer. Fais-moi savoir si cette voie-ci
de communication me reste toujours ouverte. Ruth, ch. i. vs. 16,
17.--FAITH.


1288.--_Wednesday, November 5, 1862._

BAMBOROUGH--QUITE RIGHT.


1289.--_Wednesday, November 5, 1862._

HOPE.--If you can forgive me for my unkindness, let me know when I can
write to you, and communicate my plans.


1290.--_Friday, November 7, 8, 1862._

CANTERBURY.--We are waiting. Come. No questions will be asked. Lots of
fun, Nov. 5. Hockham.


1291.--_Tuesday, November 11, 1862._

A. Z.--Je t’aime trop à te juger. Fais comme tu es convenable. Il suffit
de me rendre heureux à voir ou même à penser à ma belle, bonne,
heureuse. FAITH.


1292.--_Wednesday, November 12, 1862._

A QUIET EVENING and a LITTLE Music.


1293.--_Friday, November 14, 1862._

FIDES (invisible).--All to hand I suppose, indicating initial missing.
Thanks. The sleeping partnership affair was known to me some time ago,
and I hinted it to your senior, though I could not speak of it. I am
glad, though surprised, that you accept it with equanimity. Your
liability being limited, however, I hope you will not suffer much, and
it cannot be undone now. If you send on Saturday, let it be to same
address, I shall be at No. 3 on Monday. Carl has been confined again,
but is better: he has received urgent calls from abroad, but he seems as
stupidly obstinate as ever he was in his life, and I have little hope of
improvement in him. Southampton matters look lively.


1294.--_Saturday, November 15, 1862._

BAMBOROUGH--RECEIVED.


1295.--_Saturday, November 22, 1862._

F. a F.--Off to-day, 17th. Do not U. S. but R.P.R. Return uncertain. S.
would do.


1296.--_Monday, November 24, 1862._

BAMBOROUGH--RECEIVED--Grateful thanks.


1297.--_Tuesday, November 25, 27, 28, 1862._

CHROMO--FULGENT!


1298.--_Thursday, November 27, 1862._

HYDRA--Guards--Gorilla--Hand.--What has become of this? Though
apparently forsaken early, the interest I felt in it remains
undiminished. Still M. T. P.O., Nina, South Norwood.


1299.--_Monday, December 1, 1862._

NEVER SAY DIE.--All alone in my glory. Try again. Give me the dates of
your two last. Change the place.


1300.--_Friday, December 5, 1862._

FELIX.--Limpet must stick fast till 12th January. Springwell continues.
I. was right, and Jup’s grumble nonsense. Agreed, “more pain than
pleasure” at the gathering. I pray you write T. by 16th. Taking steps.
Be firm, true, and God bless you.


1301.--_Friday, December 5, 1862._

A. Z.--Je suis aise de savoir que tu te portes bien. Tout ce qu’on a dit
et fait n’a pas ébranlé ma confiance en toi. Les dernières paroles ont
pour moi plus de poids que tout ce que personne peut dire on faire. Mon
destin est entre tes mains. Je ne manquerai pas à mon vœu.--FAITH.


1302.--_Thursday, December 18, 1862._

SPURS and SKIRTS.--Page 296, lines 10, 11, 12. Garibaldi. Pio Nono.


1303.--_Friday, December 19, 1862._

SPURS and SKIRTS.--Page 154, lines 14, 15. Anita Pope Joan.


1304.--_Saturday, December 20, 1862._

SPURS and SKIRTS.--The father of E-- W-- informs Garibaldi Pio Nono that
all is discovered and any attempts to renew the correspondence futile,
Spurs and Skirts and the _Times_ being forbidden at S-- Lodge.


1305.--_Thursday, January 1, 1863._

A. Z.--Je te souhais “bien des retours heureux de ce jour” (tu sais que
je le manquerais plus dignement s’il était possible) et “que le nouvel
an te soit heureux.” Le vieux a assez de tristes souvenirs pour nous.
J’étais à ---- Noël: quel contraste avec celui de l’an 1861! Dieu
veuille que l’année qui vient de commencer nous rende tous deux à
l’ancien bonheur; je ne doute pas qu’il ne revienne un jour si nous
continuons à mettre notre confiance en Dieu, et à avoir foi l’un à
l’autre.--2 Cor. vii., 16. FAITH.


1306.--_Monday, January 5, 1863._

NIL DESPERANDUM.--Pray WRITE immediately, and tell me what H--r said,
and what you answered or promised. You tell me nothing. What you ask is
impossible. I told you I could not come again in the way you propose. If
you wish it as much as I do, it must be the old plan. Write. I am worse
than you are. Settle something. What a bore hats are.


1307.--_Thursday, January 8, 1863._

SMALL HOUSE--Danger. Cross the sea.


1308.--_Friday, January 9, 1863._

NIL DESPERANDUM.--If your feelings are what you describe, why do you not
WRITE oftener or arrange something? What must mine be? Do next Monday
what you did last Monday. A happy new year to you! It rests with
yourself.


1309.--_Friday, January 16, 1863._

NIL DESPERANDUM.--Thank you. How can you think they bore me? I will be
there according to your appointment, but hope to see you before if
possible.


1310.--_Wednesday, January 21, 1863._

SQUIRE TREVLYN’S Heir.


1311.--_Wednesday, January 21, 1863._

EDWARD STREET--NELSON.


1312.--_Thursday, January 22, 1863._

NIL DESPERANDUM.--RECEIVED the DOCUMENTS so effaced as to be almost
unintelligible. Floss wishes you to WRITE here unreservedly; there is no
risk; she will take care the letter only falls into Tiney’s hands. Never
doubted you.


1313.--_Friday, January 30, 31, 1863._

X. X. X.


1314.--_Wednesday, February 4, 1863._

DAVIS.--Correspondence must cease. The alliance is wrong. Active
measures, more explicit if needed--when directing friends. Will deliver
you from Bartholomew--J.D. K.V.


1315.--_Thursday, February 5, 1863._

A. Z.--J’aime à croire que nous avons tous deux les mêmes “Stunden der
Andacht” (dans plus d’un sens). Sans des anticipations de jours plus
heureux à l’avenir, ma vie, maintenant solitaire et ennuyante, serait
tout-à-fait misérable. Je puis attendre sans promesse, mais non pas sans
espoir; je puis rester sans assurance, mais point sans--FAITH.


1316.--_Tuesday, February 10, 14, 16, 17, 1863._

X. X. X.--Wednesday.


1317.--_Monday, March 2, 1863._

YOUR ROOM.--It is as I told you, it would be the night I last saw you.
Too sad; too unhappy; too wretched. Each day, if possible, worse than
the last. If I dared I wish all were over. I would give up all and
everything for eau de Cologne once more. February 9th. Look again May
1st. Take care of yourself dear A.


1318.--_Thursday, March 5, 1863._

A. Z.--J’ai reçu les trois PORTRAITS, C. d. V. Tu t’amuseras un jour, au
récit des détails. (Que c’est bon de la part des enfants!) Le tien m’a
mis en état de finir un portrait à trois-quarts de la grandeur naturelle
qui a été quelques mois en état de progrès. Tu sais à cause de qui je me
rende si rarement à ----. Je me trouve forcé de m’y rendre quelquefois.
Je souhais que cette année triste et ennuyeuse se passe. Les souvenirs
du passé me défendent d’être autre que plein d’espérance joyeuse pour
l’avenir. A parler humainement, notre destin est sous ta garde; et je
suis content, en confiance affectionnée, de la laisser là. Que Dieu te
bénisse!--FAITH.


1319.--_Tuesday, March 10, 1863._

INFELIX.--With mingled fear and hope. T. beseeches Bird to remember
promises for future conduct, so lately made. WRITE how Limpet’s health
is. Springwell forwards. List 3 is done. Take care! Be true and
steadfast, and may God bless you!--T.


1320.--_Thursday, March 19, 1863._

INFELIX.--Why is Inf. of 10th neglected? Yesterday was remembered.
Account of Limpet’s state and doings earnestly desired. Springwell
continues. T. not quite well. Tell Bird to go to H. V. when asked.
Remember 21st, and please attend to this.


1321.--_Monday, March 30, 1863._

SALVEO PEDES.


1322.--_Wednesday, April 1, 7, 1863._

SALVEO PEDES.


1323.--_Saturday, April 4, 1863._

A. Z.--J’ai une belle nouvelle pour toi. Un second paquet est arrivé; on
a tâché de faire croire que tu l’avais envoyé, mais on ne nous a pas
trompé comme ça. Il les embarrasse sans cesse, que de garder ton secret
comme tu le fais. Cela ne réussirait fas s’ils te comprenaient aussi
bien que moi. J’essayerai de te voir bientôt, car je veux te consulter
sur le projet d’aller à----l’été prochain, et sur d’autres affaires plus
importantes. Quelques efforts qu’ils fassent, ils n’ébranleront point la
foi que je mets en toi. Fais que je sache quand tu vas aller au bord de
la mer. Que Dieu te bénisse.--FAITH.


1324.--_Tuesday, April 14, 1863._

TURF.--If you respect my opinion keep away from him. In London I hear no
good. Delicacy must not prevent you communicating exact details. I will
not reproach, but assist you. Your misery is mine. Did you get books? He
must be there if I am. Select.


1325.--_Thursday, April 16, 1863._

CAN I dare to write again until I am certain of . . . . and where? . . .
Can I forget the sad request of your last!


1326.--_Friday, April 24, 1863._

TURF.--I am anxious to hear you have seen the _Times_ of April 14th. Do
you wish me to go there next month? Will the objectionable person be
there? Confide in me.


1327.--_Friday, May 1, 1863._

F. F.--Naples, Paris, or elsewhere. G. Smith’s on 15th. Not twins this
time.


1328.--_Wednesday, May 6, 1863._

A----.--Lat. 41 degrees N., long. 10 degrees W.--Pollaky, 4th May, 1863.


1329.--_Wednesday, May 20, 1863._

THE DERBY TURNPIKE TICKET.


1330.--_Friday, May 22, 1863._

ZERO.--Epsom--to the north 4 to 5. “Nous verrons.”--POLLAKY.


1331.--_Saturday, June 6, 1863._

A. Z.--Je vais expliquer l’omission du mois passé quand l’occasion
s’offria. J’ai été encore une fois à P----h! Le serment de ce jour là
reste, et restera à jamais inviolable. J’entends d’étranges rumeurs,
mais je sais qu’elles ne peuvent pas être vraies. Je rejette tout ce qui
ne s’accorde pas avec tes derniers mots. Je viens de constater une
circonstance toute particulière, qui fait abondamment voir ton désaveu
de certains procedés recent; si même j’en avais jamais douté. Quelles
que soient les rumeurs qui te viennent, crois seulement à ma confiance
et ma fidélité inébranlables.--FAITH.


1332.--_Friday, June 12, 1863._

Z.--The old doctrine of “being within the four seas” would not affect
the final issue of the case.--POLLAKY.


1333.--_Friday, June 12, 1863._

TURF.--A month has passed since we met. The photograph not sent, or
letter received. To neglect a sincere friend is foolish and unkind.
Write explicitly. I hate uncertainty. Are we to meet again?


1334.--_Thursday, June 18, 1863._

Z.--Just soon enough to be too late; with a secret which is no secret
after all.--POLLAKY.


1335.--_Thursday, June 25, 1863._

PASSE--PARTOUT.--507 . 8391--907 . 13 . 26 . 0 . 71 . 3. 2. 49 . 7--6
“70 . 03 . 41--135”?--POLLAKY.


1336.--_Monday, June 29, 1863._

PASSE--PARTOUT.--“51” . . 36 . 45--7610.--Paris--. 002! 3351 . . .
180.--8441--. . . 71065.--2nd Adv.--POLLAKY.


1337.--_Wednesday, July 1, 1863._

TURF.--The information did not reach me in time for the request to be
complied with. COMMUNICATE again.


1338.--_Thursday, July 9, 1863._

A. Z.--“Thy will be done.”--FAITH.


1339.--_Monday, July 13, 14, 1863._

THERE is happiness in calm resignation.--Lam. iii. 3-7. No. 13. “Thy
will be done.”


1340.--_Thursday, August 6, 1863._

ALFRED.--COME, oh, come. I beseech a last interview. Remember the 25th.
Although I am bound in honour and in justice to myself to give all up
then, yet I am willing to make the sacrifice, and will hand you the
greatest number. I desire to spare, if not your feelings, at least those
of some one else.


1341.--_Thursday, August 13, 1863._

VIOLET TOKEN!--Your conduct was most unaccountable, and towards “----”
most unjust. Your letters await only your honourable explanation being
given to him. He’s waited long, patiently, and at great loss. WRITE to
him immediately, with confidential explanations, by post--fear not. Or
write, as formerly, through those who passed your many previous letters.
Act on this advice honourably, and without delay. All shall end as you
wish. Pocket-book, with portraits.


1342.--_Friday, August 14, 1863._

TURF.--WRITE. It is long since I heard from you. Since we met last I
have had much trouble. When can we meet again? Brighton this autumn?


1343.--_Tuesday, August 25, 1863._

SAINT SWITHIN is so very sorry! Was the paragraph intended for him?


1344.--_Friday, August 28, 1863._

THY WILL BE DONE--the language of heaven echoed on earth.--August 27.
“We praise thee, O Lord.”


1345.--_Monday, September 14, 1863._

MIGHT, Could, Would, and Should--“The many only formed one ----”! Is W.
Hand’s address known?


1346.--_Saturday, September 19, 1863._

MR. A. G.--“Oui.” Bien fermé. V. dévoué A. F.


1347.--_Wednesday, September 23, 1863._

ONUTA.--Might, Could ----? “The many only formed one.” Send the right
address to W. Hand.


1348.--_Tuesday, September 29, 1863._

FRANKFORT MINE. One blank. One prize. One month, Treasure. Been to sea.


1349.--_Thursday, October 1, 1863._

TURF.--Why so long silent? No reply to last advertisement. Where can we
meet? My time is not at my own disposal, or I would long ago have seen
you.


1350.--_Wednesday, October 7, 1863._

PHILIP. i. 3. June 13th, 1863--“Aimée pour soi-même, aimée malgré
soi-même.” V. H. LM II. 68. Voilà une conviction qui s’établit
difficilement dans le cœur, ou que l’ennemi du genre humain s’occupe
sournoisement à dénouer les cordes qui nous enchainent l’un à l’autre,
à nous soustraire à ces communions légitimes et benies, avant-couriers
d’une heureuse éternité. Complice dans le passé de ce pouvoir ténébreux,
tremblante à ce moment-ci, fidèle maintenant et à jamais, détourne de
moi les maux que j’ai mérités très justement, car mon âme est à
genoux.--SUPPLICATION.


1351.--_Thursday, October 15, 16, 1863._

WHERE are TRUTH and HONOUR?


1352.--_Tuesday, October 20, 1863._

TRUTH and HONOUR UNIMPAIRED. Inquire at Clifton Post-office.


1353.--_Wednesday, October 21, 1863._

SIC VOLO, SIC JUBEO, &c. Di. Di. Unterzeichne die Quittung, sonst
die Qual der Armuth sollst du erleiden, “Gott sey deiner
Seele-gnädigehrloser Mann.”--Breslau.


1354.--_Tuesday, October 27, 1863._

WARMINSTER.--Wake up Kirby! Write to your afflicted Jim!


1355.--_Saturday, November 21, 1863._

TURF.--Your long silence is cruel. Why has not photo been sent, and no
notice been taken of last two advertisements? Where do you spend
Christmas? When can we meet?


1356.--_Friday, November 27, 28, 1863._

THE name explains the lost meaning--Answer. Yeovil. E.


1357.--_Friday, December 18, 1863._

FELIX.--Take the end opposite and furthest from that at which you enter.
Does Ce. keep documents again? I will observe Bird’s directions, and be
generally prudent. Limpet need not fear. Merry Christmas and Happy New
Year to you.


1358.--_Friday, December 25, 1863._

FELIX.--192 is safe. Inform T. of change of day, or plan, not later than
by post from you of Saturday. Address at Orph’s direct. The recent
notice related to Bird’s projected flight, and not to Terpsichore.


1359.--_Tuesday, December 29, 1863._

MONKEY.--Six, thirty.


1360.--_Friday, January 1, 1864._

SIESTA.--A. or P. in W. or W. Yes, always. F. & D. M. O. D. Sure. A
happy new year.


1361.--_Monday, February 1, 1864._

FRANK.--A, Yes. B, No. C, Believe no. D, Will try. F, Doubtful; payments
disputed. G, Much distressed, considers, wants further news. J. K. H.,
well. L, vexed; also disputed.


1362.--_Saturday, February 6, 1864._

TURF.--Many thanks. Why so long silent? Have been dangerously ill--still
unwell; therefore could not come or communicate. Hope to meet soon.
WRITE. Photo never sent.


1363.--_Friday, February 12, 1864._

KISMET.--Incognita, trésor de mon âme, comblée de malheur, mais à vous
toujours.--A. G.


1364.--_Monday, February 15, 1864._

INCOGNITA.--Carissima! si c’est bien vous, écrivez (comme auparavant),
je vous en supplie. Ina costante.--KISMET.


1365.--_Saturday, February 27, 1864._

WAS it really your own wish--your own plan? . . . . . I did not deserve
it! . . . I cannot so soon forget, but I have forgiven! Unless you
mention something known to us only, I shall never consider it
yours.--LOST L----.


1366.--_Tuesday, March 1, 1864._

M. N.--You are dearly loved, and always will be. All are kind. We are
well.--Q. by A.


1367.--_Thursday, March 3, 1864._

JleM.--Forgiven, never forgotten. Your heart and thoughts belong to
another. Your future: a happy one. . . . Mine? . . .


1368.--_Monday, March 7, 1864._

CITE.--Oh! that impression of yours is most wrong! Another? . . . .
There is no proof that I would refuse you, were you only to ask--you
know my address--why will you not? Do, and then judge me!--D. C.
(pencil).


1369.--_Friday, March 11, 1864._

SHOOT RIGHT AT HIM.--The game is yours alone--at present he is
powerless--Je vous aime.


1370.--_Tuesday, March 22, 26, 1864._

S. L. R.--The event you expect may be long delayed. It is quite vain to
wait. If you arrange now, you can save yourself and help me. Neglect
this, and I shall go into seclusion immediately. All will then be over.
Communicate as before, or through the _Times_, to E. C.


1371.--_Friday, April 1, 1864._

M. N.--Truly sincerely loved. Affliction brings love in its truest form.
Hope reigns strong.--Q. by A.


1372.--_Tuesday, April 12, 1864._

INFELIX FELIX.--The EASTER OFFERING was RECEIVED, and greatly valued.
Although most unfounded and unkind, J’s mammonish opinion of T. matters
not, save for its effect on you. Business progresses fairly. Be
trustful, and doubt not that matters will surely come right. Arrange
with Ce. in three or four weeks if possible. Ch. has parcel for Bird.


1373.--_Thursday, April 14, 1864._

NINNI. Gedenkest du der Rosenkrone? HUGO.


1374.--_Friday, April 29, 1864._

K. P. O.--30th--. P . . . . . M.


1375.--_Friday, April 29, 1864._

TURF.--At great inconvenience I visited P-- on Tuesday morning and
afternoon, also Wednesday afternoon. A long interview is much desired.
WRITE soon. Disappointment great.


1376.--_Saturday, April 30, 1864._

TO J. S.--I did not take advice until after you sent me word you had
gone. I have only informed our medical friend here. I have taken charge
of part of your lambs, the rest stray till Monday. I will try to keep
your absence secret till then. What must I do?--E. S., N. Wales.


1377.--_Monday, May 23, 1864._

QUIEN SABE?--Pictures,--Kind NOTE of 10th only just FOUND. Out of town.
Much regret. Please write again. Put some address.--H.


1378.--_Friday, May 27, 1864._

NOBODY.--Cigar Case Daily.--Do WRITE.


1379.--_Wednesday, June 1, 1864._

M. N.--Anxiety is most painful; is there nothing to alleviate it? Just
the same. The old, old story.--Q. by A.


1380.--_Thursday, June 9, 1864._

QUIEN SABE? 1. Pictures. “Look at the Cat”--the Serpent and the Stork.
“Civet.” Moses Scourged. “The Binding of the Dragon. A Shark’s Mouth.”
“The Dog Barks.” “The Wolf and the Lamb.” “I introduce an old
Acquaintance.” Major Ker--Callander.


1381.--_Friday, June 10, 1864._

MARIE.


1382.--_Friday, June 10, 1864._

DERNIER OWEN, I must hold my tongue.


1383.--_Friday, June 10, 1864._

COP--. 78. 543. 0. . 124. 05. 39. 0. 70.--br. mns., trapax. 8, 109 . . .
00--054--dedi--vorp--Subject, to, 174. 053. sine qua non.--53, 24,
781--0--0--134 . . . Pollaky’s Private Inquiry-office, 13,
Paddington-green, W.


1384.--_Tuesday, June 14, 1864._

SCOTLAND.--ROOKE the GRINDER, Grey, Bartletop, Staniforth, Black Bird,
B. B. B. R. and Co. RETURN immediately, t’old Meston is takken bad.


1385.--_Friday, June 17, 1864._

GET the Paddington Dandy to visit the Country, and put up at A----
Hotel. He will find the French cuisine to his taste, and at his leisure
be able to solve the enigmas of 59 and 60. All is discovered by a friend
of the innocent, who forgets not her S--R--T friend, but can do nothing
alone.


1386.--_Wednesday, June 22, 1864._

FIDES.--DOCUMENTS will AWAIT your Arrival at No. 3 on and after Tuesday
next. Both of your letters to hand. (58.62) (171.53) (248.74) (152.79)
(223.84) (25.21) (222.64) (132.74) James gone to Egypt instead.


1387.--_Thursday, June 23, July 2, 1864._

L’ABBANDONATA.--Bmfybo esb Spdigpsu sfqpsufe efbe. J tbx zpv zftufsebz
Npbuf wbjomz tfbsdife ufo zfbst Mea culpa! Mea culpa! WRITE.--G.G.


1388.--_Saturday, June 25, 1864._

FIDES.--Yours to hand. Unfortunately you mistook my last. He goes down
on Monday to number two. If you can MEET there on Tuesday, he will
doubtless be able to explain. (218.57) (250.86) (252.35) (111.48)
(170.86) (212.25) (123.44) (145.1) (155.54) (216.66) (44.20) (32.18)
(111.48) (231.8) (223.7) (225.55) (252.35) (44.20) (252.35) (225.55)
(151.23) (2) (33.67) (145.76) (145.7) (170.88). James has gone viâ
Ancona to avoid delay.


1389.--_Tuesday, June 28, 1864._

I AM doomed to silence.


1390.--_Wednesday, June 29, 1864._

WHY doomed to silence? Is there any other means? Not there to-day.


1391.--_Saturday, July 2, 1864._

V BRUNSWICK A.


1392.--_Saturday, July 2, 1864._

BLAIR ATHOL.


1393.--_Tuesday, July 5, 6, 1864._

A. E. I. With deep regret, No About.


1394.--_Tuesday, July 12, 1864._

IL n’y a rose sans épine! Mais, si de jeunesse on doit attendre beau
colorès, Palleur qui marque une âme tendre, a ses attractions. Si --.--
B., Saturday, July 9 1864.


1395.--_Thursday, July 14, 1864._

TO the LIVING DEAD, from Algeria.--Come, for now is the time.--A
faithful One at the Cape.


1396.--_Friday, July 15, 16, 1864._

FIDES.--(99.39) (3.90) (108.101) (145.1) (93.11) (8.81) (183.95)
(154.33) (223.2) (131.53) (20) (1). (189.55) (149.9) (248.101) (32.18)
(252.35) (151.79) (8.93) (58.62) (240.12) (2) (197.18) (7.82).


1397.--_Thursday, July 21, 1864._

FIDES.--(218.57) (106.11) (8.93) (17.61) (223.64) (146.7) (244.53)
(224.21) (20) (192.5) (160.19) (99.39) (No. 8) (251.70) (1) (223.64)
(58.89) (151.79) (226.69) (8.93) (240.12) (149.9) (248.101) (167.12)
(252.35) (12.31) (185.100) (149.9) (145.76) (225.55) (212.25) (20)
(241.6) (222.22) (78.45) (12.31) (66.28) (252.32) (153.33) (6.65) (20)
(2) (11.50) (142.37) (223.87) (12.31) (142.37) (105.33) (142.37)
(157.20) (58.62) (133.89) (250.86).


1398.--_Monday, July 25, 1864._

A. D.--209. 179. 211. 181. 214. 19. 512--248. 206. 1163. 861. 81165.
1166--864--80905--(Sydon, Syria--).-- Pollaky, 13 Paddington-green, W.


1399.--_Friday, August 5, 1864._

1. Yes. 2. Yes, favourable. 3. Yes. 4. Letter for S. J. H., P.O., St.
Martin’s. 5. Yes. Safe, WRITE.


1400.--_Saturday, August 13, 1864._

TATTY.--The address as of old. All is unchanged, Henri. Proffered Jan.
15th, but refused.


1401.--_Saturday, August 20, 1864._

A. M.--“Canterbury.”


1402.--_Friday, August 26, 1864._

OBAN, August 28th, Oxford.


1403.--_Thursday, September 1, 1864._

M. N.--Ever the same. Wär ich ein Vögelein.


1404.--_Wednesday, September 7, 1864._

AUT TE AUT NIL?


1405.--_Wednesday, September 7, 1864._

FIDES.--BOTH LETTERS to HAND. (58.62) (140.86) (93.11) (145.7) (17.94)
(24.94) (No. 2) (1) (198.101) (123.44) (223.64) (170.88) (12.31)
(120.63) (223.64) (131.100) (151.85) (201.80) (151.79) (182.21) (2).
Send a line to-day (Wednesday) if possible.


1406.--_Friday, September 30, 1864._

FIDES.--Do not reply again until you hear from me. You shall have a
note, as before, on Saturday morning. (58.62) (150.47) (23.28) (37.77)
(161.98) (247.33) (80.9) (251.14).


1407.--_Tuesday, October 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 1864._

HEARTS are TRUMPS DOCTOR and I declare to win the odd trick. William
Falley, Solicitor, Beaconsfield, and in London.


1408.--_Friday, October 7, 1864._

100. Very beautiful. I am trying hard; but again, what seemed a chance
has failed. Do WRITE soon.


1409.--_Saturday, October 8, 1864._

FIDES.--Yours received.--Be good enough to meet me as early as
convenient, on Tuesday, that we may discuss matters. (109.104) (148.83)
(129.50) (131.53) (157.20) (148.83) (58.62) (222.88) (134.68.69)
(127.41).


1410.--_Tuesday, October 11, 1864._

E. B. W. D. V.--“The Pembroke Castle.” 20th, cheered and strengthened.
Very thankful to you. To my life’s end I claim the right of a true
friend, and trust you to let me know if ever I can be of use by word or
deed; never feel painful or needless what would give me so much
pleasure. F. for time Ναι ο Πατηρ ὁτι ὁυτως εγενετο ειδοκια εμπρωσθεν
σον “Denique cœlum,” et de Britannia, et de India, æqualiter patet aula
cœlestis.


1411.--_Monday, October 17, 1864._

FIDES.--I have not any communication from you this morning. When, and to
what address shall I send the document you ask for in your P.S. of
Thursday? It is delayed a week, so there is not the necessity for you to
hasten your rejoinder (58.62) (164.17) (218.57) (250.86) (1) (2)
(134.35) (58.52) (111.48) (P) (17.22) (194.7) (2) (197.18) (1) (249.80)
(2) (44.36) (241.45).--Saturday, Oct. 15.


1412.--_Tuesday, October 18, 19, 20, 1864._

T--I. L--N.--“Flowrets are blooming.” “All that is wanting dear T--T. is
you.” Ill and in trouble. Be merciful as you wish for mercy. Rely on
secrecy, and pray communicate with L--Y. P--T.


1413.--_Saturday, October 22, 1864._

BONO.--Will be served.


1414.--_Saturday, October 29, 1864._

TO M.M. (etp) honc si ardh pu-- otu ellw--enierd esourcer--èpondezr ne
illeo.--


1415.--_Friday, November 4, 1864._

FIDES.--Yours to hand this morning. I was consulted yesterday upon the
question, and gave it decided approval. (100.33) (207.71) (142.37)
(174.33) (154.30) (2) (73.62) (133.71) (199.91) (227.79) (48.6) (234.35)
(265.16).--Thursday, 3rd Nov.


1416.--_Saturday, November 5, 1864._

RUNAWAY.--Yes, 21 or 31. Come to 41.


1417.--_Tuesday, November 8, 1864._

YORK in FUTURE.--They were mine. No chance of his ever seeing them, so
do not be afraid. I think I see an opening soon.


1418.--_Monday, November 28, 1864._

C. C. C.--WAKE UP. TAKE.


1419.--_Monday, November 28, 1864._

ALPHA.--Neither you nor those Newcastle persons need entertain any
personal fears whatever. You know I am not vindictive; and if under
present circumstances you both leave me entirely alone, I will with my
whole heart forgive and forget all past personal injuries. This is the
only boon I ever will accept, and I am also fully determined never to
give you (A) the information which you have tried to extort by
annoyance.--K.


1420.--_Saturday, December 24, 1864._

L’ABBANDONATA.


1421.--_Friday, December 30, 1864._

IT is a DESPOTISM.--B.


1422.--_Tuesday, January 3, 1865._

59.--Your letters frighten me a little. My brave one must overcome such
dreadful fancies. Most anxious you should act at once, so that effects
of probable failure may pass the sooner.--For ever.


1423.--_Thursday, January 5, 1865._

59.--So often in pain! . . . Implicitly do I trust in my wife. But
conceive no blind dislike for the best friend we have. It would be
narrow-minded not to tolerate differences of opinion; and is it not
enough that I should have adopted your fanaticism on this point as the
religion of my life?


1424.--_Saturday, January 7, 1865._

L’ABBANDONATA--Traurig und allein.--P. d. V. R.


1425.--_Saturday, January 7, 1865._

YORK.--Do you want to do so with anybody else’s? So disappointed
yesterday, but knew perfectly it was not your fault.--Ever.


1426.--_Wednesday, January 11, 1865._

59.--Be explicit concerning any steps you wish taken. Failure probable
in an effort here, but I think not very important.


1427.--_Thursday, January 12, 13, 1865._

PAEAN.--There is Codicil ----. .----. 06346.--“Custos rotulorum” 37. H.
8. C. T. Taken and acknowledged this day, the 11th of January,
1865.--Pollaky’s Private Inquiry-office, 13 Paddington-green, W.


1428.--_Friday, January 13, 1865._

59.--Suspicious appearance to-day. . . . As I feared, but immediately
begun at another. Want to speak.


1429.--_Saturday, January 14, 1865._

FIDES.--All documents safely received. (99.39) (194.40) (99.53) (27.86)
(2) (157.20) (134.34) (12.31) (102.101) (2) (11.50) (223.7) (171.82)
(251.76) (37.81) (253.76) (110.90) (1) (199.10) (252.35) (151.85)
(94.80) (P) (223.31) (134.41) (229.98) (8.93) (94.80) (252.96) (C)
(17.94) (92.56) (160.25) (99.26) (150.67) (154.84) (8.81) (141.10) (1)
(247.51) (127.41) (250.1) (2) (106.11) (218.57).


1430.--_Thursday, January 19, 23, 1865._

PAEAN . . . --3rd Cipher--0´5714 . . 031´371 “Rote” . . 064´3790
. .--. . 005(0) contex 57 ii. Codicil Novr. 17th, 1857.--Pollaky’s
Private Inquiry-office, 13, Paddington-green.


1431.--_Wednesday, January 25, 1865._

PAEAN--Sixth Cipher advance double--‵078154.
. . .--34‵1152--.--00´5678´09 . .--? 33--Letter dismissory--323´560.7--
-- --“Euku” 667--Rote 36, 12´24´48, 16--579, 24´8-- --? virgo, feme
covert . . . 5736, 12´ 101, 4--due 510, 20‵7, 33 G. 15. C. q part. 4. J.
C. 5.3.2.5.9. ii. 7 J. quinto exactus.--Pollaky’s Private
Inquiry-office, 13, Paddington-green, London.


1432.--_Friday, January 27, 1865._

YES.--JET.


1433.--_Wednesday, February 1, March 1, April 1, 1865._

QUITE by ACCIDENT.--Exhibition, 1851.


1434.--_Friday, February 3, 4, 1865._

BREAK BREAD AGAIN.--A bad father deserves to come to grief.


1435.--_Saturday, February 11, 14, 1865._

BUMPUS had fully foreseen importance in every point and will regard all
the good advice; watch daily for report of events.


1436.--_Thursday, February 16, 17, 1865._

FIDES.-- -- (58.62) (1) (186.67) (106.11) (149.5) (205.23) (50.72)
(222.78) (6.65) (240.12) (95.97) 151.90) (1) (250.1) (20.83) (227.4)
(85.14) (146.31) 17.94) (171.59) (No. IX.) (183.95) (193.89) (218.57)
(2.28) (149.5) (58.53) (134.68) (224.88) (131.53) (81.98) (148.21)
(171.69) (201.80) (2) (151.79) (105.42) (50.47) (131.53) (199.10)
(20.43) (33.14) (No. 3) (154.82) (88.20) (138.61) (220.18) (1) (253.76)
(149.9) (131.53) (249.103) (2) (234.35) (108.8) (2) (183.95) (142.37)
(154.82) (93.11) (129.50) (171.82) (23.28) (37.77) (20) (6.85) (58.53)
(250.86) (1) (251.53) (2) (134.78)


1437.--_Saturday, February 18, 1865._

PAEAN . . . 5. 7, 3, 06 = 53,980. = 156--720. = 0.526, 65 0. 0----? 8,
64. 3, 54. 011. Fleta!! 15. 736. 990 = 0 = 2. (refuses to act). 11. .
43, 690 =. . 33415 . . 25740 --. .--Pollaky’s Private Inquiry-office,
13, Paddington-green, W.


1438.--_Thursday, March 2, 14, 1865._

WE MET THEN for the Last Time.


1439.--_Thursday, March 2, 1865._

CARL . . . E MA . . . C.--Hope beats high that 12 of the 3rd will see a
star in the ascendant.--R. R. APSLEY.


1440.--_Friday, March 3, 1865._

MASONIC.--Does Carlisle lose the bet to-day (the 3rd), at 12? The
Burlington should decide, or Rotten-row if fine.


1441.--_Saturday, March 4, 1865._

WILL GOLDEN BROWN (M) look at the purple stain on the cross on the
breast-plate of England, at Cramer’s.


1442.--_Saturday, March 4, 1865._

MASONIC.--The bet still holds good. Can it not be lost to-day
(Saturday)? It is much desired, Masons all “good and true.” Burlington,
about noon.


1443.--_Wednesday, March 15, 1865._

“WE met, then, for the last time.” Your sister was faithful to her
promise, but you were not present. Feelings the same.


1444.--_Friday, March 17, 1865._

Z. B., 5a. If that is a rock of offence, remove it to 28 Red -- -- E. N.


1445.--_Monday, March 27, 1865._

BELLE BOYD.--What are you doing? _Times_ of to-day seen and noted here.
You will ruin H * * and W * * * and in this I cannot aid you. Still time
to go back before next mail. Answer this way, Cipher not safe. Another
will be sent. 4 A 3 D 2.--March 24.


1446.--_Wednesday, March 29, 1865._

M A H C T A P.--FQ. W. K. H. T. R. Z. X. Y. FSXBKW. DTZ. XKST. UQFHK.
FST. TFYK.


1447.--_Thursday, March 30, 1865._

4. A. 3. D. 2.--THANKS; but it is too late, the book is out of my hands
and must appear. Run no further risk on my account.--BELLE Boyd.


1448.--_Thursday, March 30, 1865._

D. L. D. pour.--S. L.


1449.--_Tuesday, April 4, 5, 1865._

FIDES.--(58.62) (10.17) (1) (86.103) (109.25) (242.74) (91.80) (1)
(105.54) (23.17) (202.52) (229.3) (149.34) (155.91) (23.17) (205.23)
(200.85) (33.67) (14.64) (12.31) (85.14) (222.71) (145.16) (70.79)
(221.51) (199.102) (17.24) (91.50) (153.33) (142.37) (183.67) (1)
(151.40) (143.39) (131.100) (1) (201.80) (105.54) (136.20) (2) (14.65)
(33.67) (142.37) (129.50) (131.53) (1) (171.82) (151.79)(32.18)(1)
(199.10) (105.42) (223.64) (150.67) (142.37) (146.104) (253.61) (239.10)
(32.18) (2) (199.10) (105.54) (131.53) (246.23) (253.76) (33.14) (149.9)
(248.96) (145.7) (249.108) (199.10) (220.18) (2) (60.78) (1) (205.23)
(134.69) (42.59) (2) (142.37) (29.62) (8.93) (12.31) (222.78) (224.102)
(224.85) (148.1) (142.37) (218.57) (250.86).


1450.--_Wednesday, April 12, 1865._

G. L.--Is your promise forgotten or delayed? Do not be blinded by
“acting.” Consummate art counterfeits nature.


1451.--_Tuesday, April 18, 1865._

M. O.---- W.


1452.--_Saturday, April 22, 1865._

TO INVALID.--Doubtless correct as to gold, A pair of gold spectacles in
addition. The name is in the bag.


1453.--_Monday, May 1, 1865._

-- -- Silence! There is such a thing as shame.


1454.--_Saturday, May 6, 1865._

TO A. C.--Cpof up gistu kpjou ublfo pvu zftufsebz--Dimpspgpsn--sfhjnft
bmpof qsfwfoufe nf gvmgj-mmjoh nz qspnjtf up zpv--Nzptpujt.--May 3rd.


1455.--_Tuesday, May 9, 1865._

MO.--D. L.D.--C.


1456.--_Saturday, May 13, 1865._

CYMBELINE.--Despair is portfolio. Get a last pencil thing. Mutual much
needed.


1457.--_Saturday, May 13, 1865._

FIDES.--(151.88) (60.76) (253.60) (58.62) (1) (146.31) (104.74) (137.11)
(222.69) (2) (99.26) (250.1) (12.31) (225.75) (252.35) (151.79) (240.12)
(2) (105.42) (8.93) (160.25) (44.21) (194.40).


1458.--_Monday, May 15, 1865._

A. D. Z. Y.--I have told you the only safe course it is not too late;
your other plan is hopeless; no professional dare do it. You must
explain fully to me; I am in the dark. You must act so that he shall be
the owner.


1459.--_Tuesday, May 16, 1865._

T:--Your telegram was duly forwarded, and fortunately in time to

                             ·   |
   ··    ·|·  ----            ·  |    ··   ( · )  ···   ·   ·|||
  ----   ·|   ----  :  ----    · |·  ----  ( · )  ----  ==  ·|||·
         ·|·  ----              ·|         ( · )         ·  ·|||

I shall return to England about the middle of June.--Pollaky.


1460.--_Thursday, May 18, 1865._

SILENCE.--“Read Carry’s Confession.”


1461.--_Thursday, May 18, 1865._

H. H.--Anxiety great. The one great chance, or rather two on same day,
passed away and gone; when conviction came you must have left the place.
Letters could not have been received. Three last to same address.


1462.--_Thursday, May 18, 1865._

FIDES.--(137.11) (222.69) (58.62) (131.53) (246.23) (253.76) (33.14)
(93.11) (145.7) (160.25) (44.21) (223.64) (150.67) (149.9) (248.96)
(215.23) (1) (60.16).


1463.--_Friday, May 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 1865._

ACIDOUX.


1464.--_Monday, May 22, 1865._

SILENCE will read the Conf. if C. will send it, or Silence will call for
it, if told where and when.


1465.--_Wednesday, May 24, 1865._

I: Citation duly served, all in best order. You may rely on my returning
about the middle of June.--Pollaky.


1466.--_Wednesday, May 24, 1865._

S. F.--5634 (347.‵0563) 574,0--9865--′005,1053--21753. 4175. 0,00'
175,86 (54.732) 8630′275--going southward on the 26th inst.--Pollaky.


1467.--_Saturday, May 27, 1865._

SILENCE.--Ask for it at any of the circulating libraries in London.


1468.--_Thursday, June 8, 1865._

H. E. (R.) 6.--Ma ché, son io Medea e pur lo lascio felice.


1469.--_Tuesday, June 13, 1865._

NOBODY. Eleven daily, c. case night. Do write.


1470.--_Thursday, June 15, 1865._

ZEETA.--I pity you, but the meeting may be sooner, when you will receive
all the jewels.


1471.--_Saturday, July 8, 11, 1865._

SILENCE.--I have read Carry’s Confession. I think I understand.


1472.--_Tuesday, July 11, 1865._

REGINA has both.


1473.--_Thursday, July 13, August 10, 1865._

M. O.----. C.----. F.


1474.--_Friday, July 14, 1865._

Y.--Silence is kind if the R. is never to return.--Z.


1475.--_Saturday, July 15, 1865._

NUNCIATUM.


1476.--_Wednesday, July 19, 1865._

D. L. J.--Yes, M. D., if you are strong enough. I can’t trust N.


1477.--_Saturday, September 2, 1865._

C. NOBODY.--If meant, is deeply grieved. If unfortunately the cause of
pain, feels hopelessly in the dark, and, therefore, in great anxiety.


1478.--_Wednesday, September 6, 1865._

FIDES.--(142.37) (58.62) (250.86) (142.37) (157.20) (218.57) (134.34)
(24.82) (99.26) (39.52) (12.31) (108.8) (149.22) (62.12) (249.50)
(134.34) (192.102) (156.4) (105.36). If then you should see this in time
write to me on Thursday with particulars, and in reply the documents
shall await your call on Saturday morning next. I leave town on Friday
evening.


1479.--_Thursday, September 14, 15, 16, 18, 25, October 2, 9, 16, 23,
30, November 6, 13, 20, 27, December 4, 11, 18, 25, 1865._

EVER the SAME.


1480.--_Tuesday, September 19, 23, 1865._

SEMPER VIGILANS.


1481.--_Thursday, September 21, 1865._

GOETHE.--Life’s a dream.--Mes rêves sont de vous. Forget me not. J’ai
bien besoin d’une lettre.--Poste restante, Bruxelles, jusqu’au 28.


1482.--_Wednesday, September 27, 1865._

ACE of HEARTS.--“Seek, and ye shall find.” Same address--WRITE.


1483.--_Friday, September 29, 1865._

FIDES.--(58.62). I have returned to England, and if you should see this
in time and will post the documents on Monday next, I shall be obliged,
for no doubt a settlement would be facilitated thereby. I shall probably
leave again on Tuesday.


1484.--_Tuesday, October 3, 1865._

SETTLED A. . . . REMEMBER PROMISE.


1485.--_Tuesday, October 3, 1865._

THE HEART of STONE.--Why torture the victim longer? Bright prospects
shine if you meet at once. Present conduct very suspicious to him who
knows all; indicates also desire to delude, and exhibits all the past
professions to have been for the same purpose. The “Martyr” can no
longer endure such ungenerous, petty insult; it out-Herods all. Address,
as before, under cover, to Mr. Pollaky, Private Inquiry-office, 13,
Paddington-green, W.


1486.--_Saturday, October 7, 1865._

PICKWICK.--J. G.


1487.--_Thursday, October 12, 1865._

THE HEART of STONE.--Fifteen years of gloomiest depression and long, sad
hours of pain and sorrow have made me what I am; but the idol of our
mutual affection having now passed into a better life, “Heart of Stone”
will relent if “Martyr” with meekness and submission befitting her
self-adopted title, consents to the conditions stated in a former
communication to Mr. Pollaky, Private Inquiry-office, 13,
Paddington-green; until then, no meeting can, or shall take place.


1488.--_Saturday, October 14, 1865._

UNCHANGED for EVER.


1489.--_Saturday, October 14, 1865._

FIDES.--(58.62). My movements have been so uncertain that I could not
earlier inform you of my engagements. Meantime I have so arranged with
the different parties that your wishes shall be met as completely as
possible. I do not think, therefore, that you need come to London on
Monday; it will suffice if you send on that day such of the documents as
may be ready, and the remainder can follow by the next Thursday’s
post.--(222.5) (134.78).


1490.--_Monday, October 16, 19, 1865._

TO JACK’S MASTER.--PEPPER is DEAD.--Dover.


1491.--_Wednesday, October 18, 1865._

MARTYR to HEART of STONE.--I accept all your conditions, with the
exception of that part of clause 5 which refers to “Corea.” I have left
all the necessary documents with Mr. Pollaky, at 13, Paddington-green,
W.


1492.--_Friday, October 20, 21, 1865._

MARGUERITE à FAUST.--I am dying with grief. Oh! come back to me, oh!
come back to me. We cannot be separated. Oh! come back to
me.--Marguerite.--Oct. 18.


1493.--_Monday, October 23, 1865._

UNCHANGED for EVER.--Uncertainty, repeat with initials of name.


1494.--_Monday, October 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 1865._

FAUST--HARRY.--Oh! come back to me. I am dying. Have pity on my poor
tortured heart. They say they cannot oppose now. It rests with you. Oh!
come, oh! come, oh! come. Have pity. Let me see you. Oh! let me see
you.--Your broken-hearted Marguerite B----.


1495.--_Tuesday, October 24, 1865._

HEART of STONE to “MARTYR.”--After so many years of lacerating agony
what are riches to me! and, now that our idol is no more, I do not press
further your acceptance of clause 5. Let our meeting take place on the
approaching anniversary of an event so indelibly impressed on the memory
of us both: and may the solemnity of our reconciliation at the hour of
our reunion not be profaned by the faintest suspicion of parsimony. I
will communicate to Mr. Pollaky the exact time and place of meeting.


1496.--_Monday, October 30, 1865._

IS the light going to depart without sending one cheering ray to the
North? Ungenerous!


1497.--_Wednesday, November 1, 2, 3, 4, 1865._

EVER the SAME.--Remain so. Wait and hope. All promises have been and
will be faithfully kept.--Coûte que Coûte.


1498.--_Wednesday, November 8, 1865._

LIGHT of the NORTH! Why ungenerous? I will prove, if possible, to the
contrary on Thursday.


1499.--_Friday, November 10, 1865._

DIPLOMAT--insert the word (No) instead of the words (if any)
7307″----2597„„. ▔▔073128, , 26----? 32 G. “reverse the
question”--misfortune makes him doubt (S.F.) 83. 00_71. 283-- ‛034,56.‛
Always prepared.--Pollaky, Private Inquiry-office, 13, Paddington-green,
W.


1500.--_Wednesday, November 15, 1865._

DIPLOMAT.--But for the fatal haste to condemn, H : Ex : would have been
right.--Between the 20th and 25th of December; the mistake did certainly
arise from the misconception of 0″ 19384. (m) 7254 ″293025----0′16, 34,
930 alluded to.--Pollaky (Private Inquiry-office), 13, Paddington-green.


1501.--_Friday, November 17, 1865._

IT WON’T.


1502.--_Thursday, November 23, 1865._

DIPLOMAT.--7″59362, 0′ -- 5, 16″71, 402--562 ===′207 , , ? 43,562 ----
′25 , , 76, 410--2 ″63. 592′0. ′34′5, 992″--aut quas sibi fabula
finxit.--Pollaky, Private Inquiry-office, 13, Paddington-green.


1503.--_Saturday, December 2, 1865._

G. B. Y. M. O. D. D. Pro ˙3÷


1504.--_Tuesday, December 5, 1865._

TELEMACHA.


1505.--_Wednesday, December 6, 1865._

FIDES.--(58.62). I have not heard from you this morning in reply to
mine, as I hoped to do. If this should be seen in time please send me
necessary particulars, so as to reach me at latest on Friday morning, as
I leave London on that day. (218.57) (146.83) (14.36) (131.100) (2)
(111.31) (155.54) (131.53) (212.5) (150.49) (188.104) (224.93) (105.42)
(181.40) (163.71) (163.39) (167.66) (1)--Tuesday afternoon.


1506.--_Saturday, December 9, 1865._

FIDES.--(58.62) (57.4) (151.79) (251.35) (8.93) (240.12) (1.) (105.42)
(94.80) (2) (1) (252.29) (2) (93.44) (129.48) (93.11) (12.31) (108.8)
(131.53) (129.48) (230.64) (145.7) (150.5) (44.36) (1) (7.81) (129.48)
(248.96) (197.8) (82.11) (206.51) (252.25) (23.28) (83.17) (247.32)
(249.108) (131.53) (144-57) (1) (121.69) (14.65) (167.12) (252.29)
(145.76) (93.44) (1) (2) (134.35) (218.57) (251.67) (24.22).


1507.--_Thursday, December 14, 15, 16, 18, 1865._

YOU LUCKY DOG! You always had your money’s. worth in your mother’s
diary. “When a little farm you keep,” have a “concert of music,” but not
with all the instruments combined, as at your departure, the details of
which were known a week after you wrote to us. You well know how loved
you must ever be by us. Daily we watch for a line, saying you are well
and happy, praying God to bless and preserve you.


1508.--_Monday, December 25, 26, 1865._

CROSS.--All burnt. Happy. Trust tremendously--(signed) ST. ASAPH.


1509.--_Monday, December 25, 1865._

WITHOUT YOU there can be neither; but faith and hope are still of good
courage.


1510.--_Monday, January 1, 8, 15, 22, 29, 1866._

EVER THE SAME.


1511.--_Wednesday, January 3, 1866._

H. to W.--British.--“Star,” “Economist.”


1512.--_Friday, January 5, 1866._

TO the CARPENTER.--Charity which never faileth, can pardon imposition if
undisguisedly confess’d. Jan. 3rd.


1513.--_Friday, January 5, 6, 1866._

CROSS.--Did you get letter safe? Write. Be firm, and don’t forget or
give him up. Absence is hard to bear. Remember the dog days. “Toujours
fidèle.” Nothing could ever change St. Asaph.


1514.--_Thursday, February 1, 1866._

EMPEREUR suffers patiently, but bides his time. Difficulties were made
to be overcome; so cheer up; get well, and right will overcome might.


1515.--_Saturday, February 3, 10, 17, 24, 1866._

COÛTE QUE COÛTE.


1516.--_Saturday, February 3, 1866._

A. L.--The MAN at the Nore.


1517.--_Thursday, February 8, 1866._

CROSS.--Steady. Steady. N’oubliez pas. Great confidence since last
interview. Say “Trivet” to St. A.


1518.--_Friday, February 9, 1866._

CROSS.--Have been round once. Dine at R. with M. to-day (Friday).--St.
A.


1519.--_Saturday, February 10, 1866._

ECCENTRICITY.--Thanks. All safe. Answered same day. Will do all you ask.
Shan’t write at present without further orders. Can’t find any that
wash, but several that require heat. Hope you will not lose your senses
again until next year. I hope not to. Write soon. So dreary. True as
steel. Feb. 8th.


1520.--_Saturday, February 24, 1866._

SECRET.--“Our Corner.”--“11th March, 1863.” Old letters and old
reminiscences bring you back; why drive me to the life I lead? Why have
made me spend such a miserable month, when the present and future are
entirely yours?--“SECRET.”


1521.--_Monday, February 26, 1866._

FELIX.--THANKS. Why the gap and different tone between the sittings?
Jup’s speech to Ch. was strange. Mem. . E. & Co’s remarks. Prospects
improve, needing only B--ie’s cheering trust. Stamps naughty. Please
write; T. waits details which affection and duty dictate. Letters
forwarded.


1522.--_Wednesday, February 28, 1866._

SEMPER VIGILANS. No. 1.


1523.--_Saturday, March 3, 10, 17, 24, 1866._

COÛTE QUE COUTE.


1524.--_Wednesday, March 7, 8, 9, 1866._

TO *******.--“Bless, and curse not.”


1525.--_Thursday, March 8, 1866._

AAN THEODOR G.--Van uw vertrek weet nag niemand. Uwe bedrocfde onders en
uw vriend verzocken u dringend terugtekomen, alles is dan geschikt. Zoo
gy niet wilt geef dan ten minste een adres op waar men u een brief Ran
zenden.


1526.--_Saturday, March 17, 1866._

FELIX.--Was notice of 26th Feb. seen? Write soon, or when next at Nat.
as seems best. Remember 18th and Easter Union. T. waits news from B--ie
anxiously. No sign even on Jun’s last. God bless you.


1527.--_Tuesday, March 27, April 3, 10, 17, 24, May 1, 8, 15, 22, 29,
June 5, 12, 19, 26, 1866._

THE TWIN LOCKETS.


1528.--_Tuesday, April 3, 1866._

FAITHFUL and TRUE.--“Absence makes the heart grow fond.” “Out of sight,
out of mind.” Which?


1529.--_Tuesday, April 3, 1866._

EMPEROR longs to have some NEWS, and an address where you can safely
receive a letter. Hope on, hope ever. To the brave and faithful nothing
is difficult.


1530.--_Friday, April 6, 7, 1866._

H. P. WISHES.


1531.--_Saturday, April 7, 1866._

CROSS.--He feels so lonely. He misses 12. so, and thinks of nothing but
÷÷. Be firm and stanch, and let nothing turn aside. For God’s sake be
steady and true. All will come right.--St. Asaph.


1532.--_Tuesday, April 10, 1866._

CROSS.--May I not write? Don’t quite forget ÷÷. It maybe hard to
remember the 11th this week, but do try. Toujours fidèle. Don’t
change.--St. A.


1533.--_Saturday, April 14, 1866._

FELIX.--Welcome, though short and cold; burn not, but forward all. Where
all interests, all is news. Silence kept T. sorrowful from Nat. Send
parcel by E. & Co., and please complete chron. tab. Old and dear ties
forbid destroying all, but weeding shall have care. Note all that
passes. Glad B--ie is well, and God bless you.


1534.--_Friday, April 27, 1866._

BIRDIE MIA is going home to snowdrop daily.


1535.--_Thursday, May 3, 1866._

FAITHFUL and TRUE.--“Hope deferred maketh the heart sick.”--H.


1536.--_Thursday, May 3, 1866._

FAITHFUL and TRUE.--Did you receive it? Better.


1537.--_Tuesday, May 8, 1866._

FAITHFUL and TRUE.--Man proposes, but God disposes. Trust and hope. I’ll
pray for thee.


1538.--_Tuesday, May 8, 1866._

CAVE.--Had note next morning. Away “for the present.” Interview
afterwards. Reply--“Oh, nothing.” All yours to hand. Semper idem.


1539.--_Wednesday, May 9, 1866._

CERTIFICATES:--J C G. extra. C D B 2d class WRAH 2d class. L M’ L 1st
class. A N. 2d class. A F 2d class. R F W extra. W. R. T. extra. J N T
extra. E J W extra. H C extra. N W D P 1st class. A W m 1st class. Leg
1st class. T C F none. A G S 2d class. BLS 1st class. WLD extra. FGDA
extra. R H m 2d class. T H S extra. C F R extra. S. R. extra.


1540.--_Saturday, May 12, 1866._

HOPING in vain month after month makes the heart sad and weary. Could I
but know the end of all this ceaseless care and anxiety for one whom it
has been my misfortune to know but too well. True as ever.


1541.--_Monday, May 14, 1866._

TELEMACHA! Telemacha.


1542.--_Thursday, May 17, 1866._

THE BLUE RIBAND that “had been worn.” Filled with anxiety. Pray WRITE a
single line.--Trust me.


1543.--_Thursday, May 24, 1866._

REGRET.


1544.--_Wednesday, May 30, 1866._

DO you not scorn me? If I but knew the course to pursue for the best, I
might dare allow myself to reflect.


1545.--_Saturday, June 2, 1866._

X19212, 712121119xx, z04, 0, 204111114x, 20B25x, xca7019, 20az, B1111c
2019 18 19 2z, 2104xx1421 319, x7m, z04. 204111114x, z67z, m04a, H042z,
1119za112, a 2319xx, 18B12 19, XB119.


1546.--_Monday, June 4, 1866._

CEASELESS care and anxiety.--Equally true.


1547.--_Monday, June 4, 1866._

T. T. C. L. H. to CR. T.B.--Grateful for one blessed gleam of sunshine
after a weary, weary winter. Love is strong as death.


1548.--_Wednesday, June 20, 21, 1866._

TICK is through.


1549.--_Monday, June 25, 26, 27, 1866._

COPENHAGEN.--T. S.--J. A.--1835.


1550.--_Friday, June 29, 1866._

COPENHAGEN.--T. S . . . ., “John Arnold,” Hôtel du N . . .,
1835.--POLLAKY.


1551.--_Saturday, June 30, 1866._

VERITE.


1552.--_Tuesday, July 3, 1866._

DO NOT FORGET the BEEF TEA.


1553.--_Friday, July 6, 1866._

I DO not scorn you, I know, “To err is human, to forgive divine.”


1554.--_Saturday, July 15, 1866._

IF you have 43 mauve, change 5 azure to 28 red directly. 7 p.m.--E. N.


1555.--_Tuesday, July 31, 1866._

SARAWAK.--Aku bri tabi sama. Tuan Doctor J. C., minta surat,
Salamat.--JABEL.


1556.--_Wednesday, August 1, 1866._

K. G. A.--Everything shall be as you wish it this week. Very quiet, and
good. Be steady, true, and do as you know it is wished. A letter waits.
WRITE, cheer up, and be strong.--“Cross--Magpie.”


1557.--_Tuesday, August 7, 1866._

M. M. M.--The landlord is very troublesome.--August 6, 1866.


1558.--_Friday, August 24, 1866._

MAGGY’S DRINK to RATS and POTATOES. Do WRITE, in great sorrow.--A. M.,
Isaehs nee, Yvab ot Noswad.


1559.--_Wednesday, September 5, 1866._

S. P. T. M. B. R.--Resting, hoping, longing, yet contented,
trusting.--P.


1560.--_Friday, September 7, 1866._

BLUE and WHITE. Stake your very soul on C. We must win. WRITE by
return.


1561.--_Friday, September 7, 1866._

1 2. 9.--15 22 7, 14 22, 8 22 13 23, 24 12 9 9 22 8 11 12 13 23 22 13 24
22, 4 18 7 19, 9 22 24 7 12 9 12 21, 24 12 15 15 22 20 22, 18 7, 4 18 15
15, 22 3 11 15 26 18 13, 19 12 4, 7 19 18 13 20 8, 8 7 26 13 23, 18, 20
12, 26 25 9 12 26 23, 13 22 3 7, 14 12 13 7 19.


1562.--_Monday, September 10, 1866._

FELIX.--Mrs. F. safe, prays detail of doings and return; leaves Tre soon
for busy poorly O, then visits till springs. On B----ie the future
rests, if true and firm ’twill do. M. and Ce were sunlight, parcel at
Frau’s; write 2 and Co. occasionally; enjoy, be good, and God bless you.
All well; thanks.--Sept. 7.


1563.--_Monday, September 24, 1866._

CROSS.--Thousand thanks for letter. Awfully pleased and delighted to get
it. Don’t like the idea of the trip to L. on Tuesday at all. Hope it
won’t be as un. T. as the last time, when you were unkind. Wish you to
stop quiet where you are, and rest from your labours. Is the
surveillance very strict? Is P. O. under old man’s thumb and dangerous?
I’m not sure of being there on 26th. I think Trees might be managed; it
would be a great comfort. Don’t give up; in case of going to L. be firm
and write. Yours till death, MAGPIE.


1564.--_Saturday, September 29, 1866._

OF what avail is it to say there is neither change nor uncertainty, and
yet make no sacrifice to prove it by endeavouring to put an end to
mutual unhappiness? Time is fleeting.--M.


1565.--_Wednesday, October 3, 1866._

C. E.--There is always some soul of goodness in things evil, would men
observingly distil it out.--POLLAKY.


1566.--_Thursday, October 4, 1866._

ST. A. was at T’s on Monday; shall go 4½ Thursday and Friday. Very
wearing here. Don’t risk much. Absence will be accounted for. All more
than ever quiet.--T.


1567.--_Friday, October 26, 1866._

BLUE and WHITE.--Do not despair, darling. All will end well. I shall be
for ever our old motto.


1568.--_Saturday, October 27, 1866._

CONCLAVE of SOVEREIGNS.--Sion-mount, November 6th, 1866, M.--St. John G.
Lipscombe, S.G.T.G.


1569.--_Tuesday, October 30, 1866._

L’AFRICAINE.--You take too much blame. Look forward, not backwards.
Affair here drawing to termination. Send “remember.”


1570.--_Monday, November 19, 1866._

101. 14. 6. 8. 75. 59. 454. 148. 79. 47. 7. 8. 6. 23. 46. 9. 7. 447.
511. 2. 5. 12. 9. 7. 568. 7. 5. 45. 595. 109. 980. 7. 57. 84. 6. 3. 49.
432. 464. 49. 8. 5. 5. 7. 6. 64. 2. 3. 4. 6. 643. 3. 6. 65. 543. 6. 6.
594.


1571.--_Friday, November 23, 1866._

AS opportunities appear unattainable, why don’t you try other means open
to you? Are you afraid to trust me? It should be sacred. I have done all
I can, more than you think.


1572.--_Saturday, November 24, 1866._

MY FRIEND.--Should you receive a letter posted possibly to-morrow, it is
important that you should read it. I shall, in that case, be awaiting
your answer, no, not at . . . . . ., but within a very short distance.
Suspend your judgment until you receive it, and then let this act speak
that regard which the expression of irrepressible feelings has hitherto
apparently failed to convey. I ask for nothing but confidence, faith in
me. Oh, drive me not to yet more utter affliction. Why leave me to the
limited resource of A’s to know you are even alive, but still not to
know how you are?--Friday, Nov. 23.


1573.--_Saturday, December 1, 1866._

MORE than nice looking; it is very handsome. Do not write again till you
hear from me. I hope to see you soon. With best love, &c.--F.--How much
longer is Patience to wait? Do, pray, let me hear from you at once. You
are sure to see this, and you see how obedient I am to your
commands.--T. . Y.


1574.--_Thursday, December 6, 1866._

PENNY LAND to WILL.--“Papa! Pockey--hankey hi?” Would you not like to
see little Gussie again?


1575.--_Saturday, December 8, 1866._

HYDROCELE.--Breaker can be leaved, according to self-experience, by
external middles. Please address, post paid, to R. S. B., N 375,
Esslingen, Kingdom of Würtemberg.


1576.--_Wednesday, December 12, 1866._

A walk over the breezy hills: standing at the gate and sitting at the
style. 28th November, 1865. Do WRITE. Why leave me like this? Is it
fair?--T.


1577.--_Saturday, December 29, 1866._

MANAGEMENT.--P. Q. R. There are two. Ubiquitous.


1578.--_Friday, January 4, 1867._

BROWN, YELLOW, and GREEN.--I hope you enjoyed last night, and that all
was quite “Ty.” I hope old friends were not forgot. Cheer up and be
happy and don’t be low. All will be well. Don’t distrust yours most firm
till death.--“St. A.”


1579.--_Saturday, January 12, 1867._

FAT OXEN.--Starving people.--The fat oxen are gone from their glass
palace, and are eaten by the rich; the starving people remain in their
overcrowded fever dens, and are being eaten by disease. Fat Oxen.
Starving people.


1580.--_Friday, January 18, 1867._

YELLOW amd RED.--Don’t forget, and mind and be steady to-night. He is
ever thinking. Be firm, and don’t be got round. Yours till death.--“St.
A.”


1581.--_Thursday, January 31, 1867._

TO S . . . . y.--All right, rest in peace; would if knew. Forgive me;
give my life for you.--J . . y.


1582.--_Monday, February 18, 1867._

FEB. 16th (through accident delayed.)--225 : 452. 6. 2 ! 080 . . ., 192
´´772, ´´16753. 14. 58. 857, 884, 165--. 954.--,? 732. . 976-- : 98070.
. ˙ . 063, ˙451. 755. 13, 65. .,? v. 162. , . 053 M. C. C. 871331
913. . : 189. .761850.=: 771. POLLAKY--(13 P. G . r . n).


1583.--_Saturday, February 23, 1867._

THE JUMP; B. B: 20th Feb.: Bertie and Dot: over! both Feet.


1584.--_Saturday, March 2, 4, 1867._

C. A. Y. Z!


1585.--_Tuesday, March 5, 1867._

C. A. Y. Z!--“Pity me not! but lend thy serious hearing to what I shall
unfold.”


1586.--_Wednesday, March 13, 1867._

M. W. M. S. Q. S. R. W. R. M. S. Q. S equally true.


1587.--_Saturday, March 16, 1867._

M. W. M. S. L. S. R. W. R. M. S. L. S. Equally true.


1588.--_Tuesday, March 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 1867._

WHY LITTLE GIRL LEAVE OLD MAN all Alone?


1589.--_Tuesday, April 9, 10, 1867._

FALCON.--I MARVEL!


1590.--_Tuesday, April 9, 1867._

JUVENAL, Sat. X Quid enim ulla negaverit, &c.--Will “A Friend” give
details? Too true, but denied. Secrecy promised. She is gone. Enable
both to do and to receive justice.


1591.--_Tuesday, April 23, 1867._

TIME and time over time for ever flown, Mimi! Serpent, Dove, and
Geranium still never.--MONTIE.


1592.--_Saturday, April 27, 1867._

INFELIX.--Will W--y ne’er write home again? Silence (which pains your
family) annuls not the past, or its claims upon the future, to which,
spite of fickle fortune’s frowns, T., unchanged, looks hopefully in the
strength of duty, truth, and love. Chro: tabn days kept with sweet
regrets, Mem: pin, ket, lave.--Bi--e must have much to say. Acknowledge.
God bless you!


1593.--_Monday, May 6, 1867._

E. G. G. (en voyage). Grenoble. Grenoble. First Grenoble. Act
accordingly. Vogue la Galère.


1594.--_Tuesday, May 7, 1867._

1--2--3.--.


1595.--_Tuesday, May 7, 1867._

FELIX.--Family grateful for W--y’s sad, yet sweet letter. Continue what
Nat stopped, notifying plans, health, and cause of Jup’s continued
coldness. F’s concert was meant. Little one fed and thought of; Limpet
daily wanted on its rock. Cheer up. Trust and love must triumph. God
bless you.


1596.--_Thursday, May 9, 1867._

E. G. G. (en voyage), Grenoble.--See the _Times_ of 6th, B. E. N. is
well up; his figures are unexceptionable. Remember me to “Dear little
Billy A----n.” Vogue la Galère.


1597.--_Friday, May 10, 1867._

IF you have 14 light fawn, have 54 crimson, give 28 red 29 ruby 14 rose
7 purple (6 green without 4 green without 4 fawn) to E. N., 20 ruby.


1598.--_Thursday, May 16, 1867._

E. G. G. (en voyage), Grenoble.--See the _Times_ of 6th. Vincit omnia
Veritas.


1599.--_Monday, May 20, 21, 1867._

A. B.--Lilly of the Valley.


1600.--_Wednesday, May 22, 1867._

MEREDITH or M----N.--SCRAP of 8th RECEIVED, and answered as desired.
Your silence unkind, inconsistent, unwise, and inexplicable. The plot
thickens--“You know who” again threatens. Write at once and fully to
last address, or advertise in the _Times_, or I may unconsciously and
unwillingly act against your wishes. Forewarned is forearmed. I wish to
know how the cat jumps. Send full address. Yours ever.


1601.--_Thursday, May 23, 1867._

1 2˙ 3.--


1602.--_Thursday, June 6, 1867._

CAMPANULA ROTUNDIFOLIA.--Your unknown views are sending her to her
grave.


1603.--_Wednesday, June 26, 1867._

ARCHE HEMISSE PANTOS.--One yes. Two yes.


1604.--_Friday, July 12, 1867._

E. G. G. (en voyage) Grenoble.--Yes--Grenoble. Lyons--(x St. Etienne
x)--Caen. Southampton, London.--X.


1605.--_Saturday, July 13, 1867._

B. E. N.--All honourable men! “Praeterea censeo Carthaginem esse
delendam.” Vox Populi! Vox Dei! Vive Gutenberg! Vivent les
Imprimeurs!--X.


1606.--_Monday, July 22, 1867._

T. S.--When you dig a pit for another, you are sure to fall into it
yourself.--Pollaky, 13, Paddington-green.


1607.--_Thursday, August 1, 1867._

F. W.--Same as P. M. 66--D--“Sy”--Be WATCHFUL--C. L--C--C C.


1608.--_Thursday, August 1, 1867._

CLARA.--The LITTLE BRAT with one it has COME HOME. Address Cox and Co.


1609.--_Thursday, August 1, 1867._

B. E. N. (Aut Cæsar aut nullus). Depuis vingt ans abreuvé de dégouts.
Croesus on Nemesis? Nemesis. La Manche et Southampton.--X.


1610.--_Wednesday, August 7, 1867._

SCIROCCO, 3 ten August. Bin gesund, noch nicht nach Hause gegangen, aber
bald. Alle Briefe erhalten. Danke. “And your eyes said work for glory.
Up, up, where the angels--call.”


1611.--_Thursday, August 8, 1867._

NAB-en voyage,--. .  736. 186. 170, 04926, follow, track, 124, 33. 37.
39. 11. 1, 6, 11, 24, 38, 56, 13, 161, 77, 32, 041--4397, 261, 004, 1,
8, ´46, 16003. 427--. . 183. 930.--12, 10. 14, 6. 7. 23.--POLLAKY, 13,
Paddington-green.


1612.--_Saturday, August 31, 1867._

L . . EVYODEV. ED.


1613.--_Saturday, August 31, 1867._

MY STAR of HOPE WANES to WHITE. News that you are better would revive
its glow.--B.


1614.--_Monday, September 4, 5, 1867._

B.--If the news that I am better will avail, let the star regain its
glow.


1615.--_Monday, September 9, 1867._

20.--Vous avez été un grand fardeau de son âme. Il espère que vous ne
coupez plus ce qui est dangereux à couper. Oh, comme la petite boîte à
fusée est chèrea lui. Il a quitté Prague.


1616.--_Wednesday, September 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30,
October 1, 1867._

NINE OF US.--E. W. F. S. T. T. Y. D. and G.--At Mr. Smith’s.


1617.--_Friday, September 20, 1867._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--See the _Times_ of 17th. Modern languages? No. My
three languages, even this year, have not produced me as much as I have
paid to a carpenter for wages.--X.


1618.--_Friday, September 27, 28, October 1, 1867._

“THREE PIGEONS.”


1619.--_Monday, October 14, 1867._

Le refus était le plaisir. Chaque soir et matin pour 20 mois passés.
Cruel seulement être aimable. Donc, il n’y a qu’un--entre les deux.


1620.--_Tuesday, November 5, 1867._

SNUGGERY.--One tiny converse, and I shall know you are watching my
yearning and sorrowing, and much more.


1621.--_Friday, November 15, 1867._

PER. . . Most perfidious. Why this cruel------? Sagge is deserted. Fly
to your neglected C.....tta.


1622.--_Wednesday, November 20, 1867._

E. HOPE.--Happy contemplations; the coolness on Wednesday, the bitter
disappointment of Thursday, (occasioned doubtless by) the arrangements
for Friday, which were so considerate. Not to smart would indeed be
unfeeling.


1623.--_Monday, December 2, 1867._

6 t f 2 y 1 w--9 v 88--n d m f 2 v j j v f 8--4 t p v--8 d 6 v 2 y w 4 j
v b--a v--2 v j a v--i f y j v--j d. E. D. W. d 6--9 2 v 88--n d m--a
n--d i 1--8 i v v j--e v j.


1624.--_Saturday, December 7, 1867._

L. B. and PARTNER were feelingly remembered on the 5th. The Cock Sparrow
chirruped his ditty at one thousand and twelve.


1625.--_Saturday, December 7, 1867._

E. HOPE.--Some positively might have been averted, others mitigated.
There is much in extenuation. He drew no such character, and knows the
reverse, herein, you are unjust to both. To ensure peace the mistakes of
the past should be admitted, and remembered only to be avoided. Let each
be just to and cherish the other, but true to self; then will the
anguish have not been in vain. Dec. 5.


1626.--_Thursday, January 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 1868._

TERPSICHORE.


1627.--_Tuesday, March 24, 26, 1868._

JE VIS en ESPOIR.--Many waters will not wash out love.


1628.--_Tuesday, March 31, 1868._

JE VIS en ESPOIR.--Seen by Accident. Over the sea and back? Hope
deferred. Perfect love means perfect trust.


1629.--_Friday, June 5, 6, 8, 1868._

A.--The Engineer has escaped from the Maories, saving nothing but his
scalp. Mutual enemies should make mutual friends. Utu wanted.


1630.--_Thursday, June 25, 1868._

1868.--Lady Elizabeth--To TOURIST A,--No. 1.--Yes, yes, yes. At once.
And with you. See “Practical General Continental Guide,” page 229
(Simpkin, Marshall, & Co., London). Paris, the Rhine, Baden-Baden,
Switzerland, Milan. “No Thoroughfare. .” Lay, 500.


1631.--_Saturday, June 27, 1868._

TOURIST A,--To Lady ELIZABETH.--Quite ready, if you will write to
address given on Thursday. Let me hear from you somehow immediately. Lay
800.


1632.--_Tuesday, June 30, 1868._

1868.--Lady ELIZABETH--To TOURIST A.--Yes, yes, yes. At once. And q at
night. See “Practical General Continental Guide,” page 212 (Simpkin
Marshall & Co., London). Paris, the Rhine, Baden-Baden, Switzerland,
Milan, Venice. “No Thoroughfare.” Gold, £500.


1633.--_Thursday, July 2, 1868._

TOURIST A. to Lady ELIZABETH.--We will meet, tried by suffering, to
forget and remember. See Practical General Continental Guide, Simpkin,
Marshall & Co., p. 212.


1634.--_Thursday, July 9, 1868._

TO STRAY BUZWINGS.--Hark! the Lark at Heaven’s Gate Sings!--Lodge
69.344. The SUMMER LARK will occur at the Buzwing-hall, on Thursday, the
23rd inst., at 6.30 p.m. Banquet at 8 p.m. Rising of the Larks at 9.30.
Nests at 1 a.m.


1635.--_Friday, July 31, 1868._

MONSIGNOR. . . -- Many roads lead to Rome, but how to return? The way is
too crooked, even for POLLAKY.


1636.--_Wednesday, August 12, 1868._

LAPIN.--Quel guignon! mille remerciements pour l’intention. Soyez bénie,
et croyez que je suis et serai toujours le même.


1637.--_Saturday, August 15, 1868._

NO. 3.--Je crus qu’elle fut loin, quand elle était tout proche sous mes
yeux. Shall have this on my tombstone--Where is the clock?


1638.--_Friday, August 21, 1868._

LAPIN.--Ma seule joie! encore, par charité, racontez tout. Pas nommée,
bien triste, mais plus que jamais ce que vous savez.


1639.--_Saturday, August 29, 1868._

LAPIN.--Quel supplice, savoir quelles influences vous entourent,
recevoir pareilles lettres, pas pouvoir répondre! Si froides!
très-inquiet; ayez pitié! Je vous l’ai prédit.


1640.--_Monday, August 31, 1868._

THE STORM at APPENWEIR.--Go. Go. Go. She whom you met at Heidelberg has
seen Her. You may trust her. Go.


1641.--_Wednesday, September 2, 3, 1868._

LAPIN.--Fais vrais efforts pour être patient, confiant; vous ne m’aidez
guères. Ennuyée jadis me racontiez tout, aujourd’hui, amusée, vien! Faut
absolûment que vous écrive une fois, trop injuste me priver seule
défense ce qui facile autrefois pas impossible aujourd’hui. Lettre
reçue, rien dedans.


1642.--_Saturday, September 5, 1868._

LAPIN.--Lettre Lundi gentille. Demande pas choses compromettantes,
seulement noms personnes voyez, genre vie menez. Comme l’an dernier:
ouvertement, jamais prohibé. Réticence rend jaloux.


1643.--_Wednesday, September 16, 1868._

LAPIN.--Plus de huit jours sans m’écrire. Je ne peux plus douter de la
vérité. Mon cœur est presque brisé. Que Dieu vous pardonne. Adieu.


1644.--_Monday, September 28, 1868._

LAPIN.--J’espére que quand nous nous reverrons, tout s’éclaircira. En
attendant, croyez que je ne suis ni injuste pour le passé, ni ingrat
pour le présent.


1645.--_Tuesday, September 29, 1868._

MURILLO and EUCLID.--Thursday Red. 1.50 train.


1646.--_Tuesday, October 6, 1868._

FIRST CLASS.--Fare One Shilling.


1647.--_Thursday, October 15, 16, 17, 1868._

B. E. N. (my Premier).--What do you intend to do with “Old Tom,” of
Grenoble?--E. W.


1648.--_Monday, October 19, 1868._

B. E. N. (my second).--What is your opinion of Christopher Columbus’s
egg trick?--E. W.


1649.--_Tuesday, October 20, 1868._

E. E. N. (My third).--I know that Christopher Columbus’s egg trick was
only symbolical, and not real. E. G. G. is, or ought to be, at
Southampton.--E. W.


1650.--_Thursday, October 29, 1868._

ONE.--nx--hr hkk; cn mns khjd sn kdaud xds. Gnv knmf mnshbd vntke xnt
vams udqx jhmc sgntfgsr.


1651.--_Wednesday, November 4, 1868._

ONE.--Amx cax aesdq sgd svdksg fkae sn ldds, fn vgdqd, ame ar knmf ar
xnt khjd. Aesdq h fn sn h Akk oaqshbtkaqr.


1652.--_Friday, November 6, 1868._

B. E. N.--You know what happened to my money and papers in the heart of
the city of London. It is utterly impossible to mistake the power that I
have to contend with; even here, with success unexpected, unexampled,
and unprecedented, i.e., for Vulcan’s head clerk; for me, “Le jeu ne
vaut pas la chandelle!”--CYGNE.


1653.--_Monday, November 9, 1868._

B. E. N. (Cygne).--Does any one want your place? Not one but two
aspiring, and, of course, fiery young Vulcan want mine; thus, roasted on
both sides, I am sure to be “done brown.” What a fool I was to kill the
goose that laid the golden egg! I made sure that it would make my
fortune; I have had nothing but misfortune ever since. Like the Romans,
my solace is, “Civis Londinum sum.”--Pope’s Head-alley.--MARECHAL.


1654.--_Wednesday, November 11, 1868._

B. E. N. (Cygne).--Hardly the first, as my “silver cord” is already
stretched too far. No more “Londinum” for me? Are not the rivers of the
East better than the waters of the “Serpentine”? Crocodiles’ eggs only
hatch in “Roman” earth. With not a “drop” to drink.--“La VEUVE.”


1655.--_Saturday, November 14, 1868._

B. E. N. (Old Tom).--Méfiez-vous des veuves. Oh! what a fool I was to
kill the goose that laid the golden egg! And such an egg! Le gamin de
Londres. Tom’s Coffee-house.--E. W.


1656.--_Tuesday, November 17, 1868._

B. E. N.--(Le 10 Décembre).--Quand je contemple les étalages des gros
marchands d’œufs, il me vient toujours l’idée qu’il neige de gros
flocons d’or sur La Manche, et qu’un petit bateau français déploie
toutes ses voiles pour les attraper.--E. W.


1657.--_Tuesday, December 1, 1868._

WHOOLY BEAR.--Ch--rlton. Danger. Write fully to “the General’s Friend”
only. No. 21, or per Queen.


1658.--_Thursday, December 31, 1868._

ALL. at. B. one P. laid. up. men. waiting. long. grim. sorry. train.
rite. B. speed.


1659.--_Monday, January 4, 1869._

THE WHITE DO . . . .--Oh, sir, please do come and see the Cross.


1660.--_Monday, January 4, 1869._

ONE.--Hpu 2 opuft--tpssy zpv xfsf tp jmm--ipqf rvjuf xfmm opx--mpoh x6z
po kpvsofz--wfsz nvdi cfuufs--wfsz ljoc uipvhuit--gffm mpofmz.


1661.--_Saturday, January 9, 1869._

WHITE DOVE.


1662.--_Saturday, January 9, 1869._

TO S. H. H.--Susammne tuto yuyon fufruromum alullul.


1663.--_Thursday, January 21, 1869._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--Grenoble. Ten thousand times, Grenoble. Decimals
are but as dust in the balance.--E. W.


1664.--_Friday, January 22, 1869._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--Pitch Decimals to little boys at school; the
proper place for them; but pitch yourself into the “Hotel du Commerce,”
at Grenoble; the proper place for you.--E. W.


1665.--_Monday, January 25, 1869._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--The present at Christmas, as I predicted, has
turned out a fool’s paradise. You will find K. E. Y. at Grenoble; that
will not turn out a fool’s paradise.--E. W.


1666.--_Wednesday, January 27, 1869._

ONE hpu uxp gppmt uijt ujnf yuyou tuare fuan suotulher.--S. H. H.


1667.--_Wednesday, February 3, 1869._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--K. E. Y. left Southampton on 20th Jan.; Caen on
23rd; took tea (avec deux œufs à la coque) at Austin’s Hotel, Paris, on
24th; is detained at St. Etienne; and calculates on being at Lyons on
4th inst., and Grenoble on the 10th (Hauptverbindungsstrassen).--E. W.


1668.--_Friday, February 5, 1869._

SOMERSET HOUSE, Dead-house, Strand, nine weeks since.--Cheshire Cheese.


1669.--_Tuesday, February 9, 1869._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--Where are you? Turn up and show yourself. K. E.
Y. is in Grenoble, waiting for you, and has nothing better to do than to
read Fielding’s “Tom Jones” and re-translate Disraeli’s two French Cooks
in Tancred (Rosenfarbig).--E. W.


1670.--_Wednesday, February 17, 1869._

ONE.--Cmm opuft sfdfjwfe--hmbe zpv bsf rvjuf xfmm--buo--hppe ofxt
gspn--jo upmfsbcmf hppe ifbmui--wfsz ljoe nipvhiut.


1671.--_Friday, February 19, 1869._

C. V. C.--Builders.--V. C. V.--Sands are shifting; what time is it?
Rocks splitting, look to your foundation.


1672.--_Monday, February 22, 1869._

SATINPIPER.--Alla svänska näktergaller vänta langtande pa din framkomst
i vartiden.


1673.--_Monday, February 22, 1869._

E. G. G. (en famille).--The Jew is strong, the Greek is stronger, the
Gipsey is still stronger, but the Counterfeit is the strongest of all,
having beaten the Gipsey. (Horsemonger-lane, 1848.)--E. W.


1674.--_Friday, February 26, 1869._

E. G. G. (en famille).--Pitch Decimals into the river “Isère,” and let
them float down to the Mediterranean, and find their way by Egypt to
Arabia, whence they came. (Pocket-book, 1853.)--E. J. W.


1675.--_Monday, March 1, 1869._

NO BODY, NO BODY.--Again drifted on the uncertain sands of time in
silent doubt. Yours received.--P.M., Saturday, 5 o’clock, Feb. 13th.


1676.--_Tuesday, March 2, 1869._

E. G. G. (en congé).--Like Caractacus, when prisoner at Rome, I cannot
forget that the “Honorables,” whose abilities, measured by their
salaries, must be colossal, envied me my humble cottage in Great
Britain. Not the ides of March, but the river March remember.--E. J. W.


1677.--_Wednesday, March 3, 1869._

LITTLE ONE.--Hoop came. Heartsick. Cold letter. No hope. Weary of life.
Old man.


1678.--_Friday, March 5, 1869._

E. G. G. (on y est).--La Providence n’est pas toujours avec les forts
bataillons. Leave K. E. Y. in Grenoble, but transfer your valuable
services from the “Isère” to the “March.” Read the “Hamburger
Nachrichten.”--E. J. W.


1679.--_Saturday, March 6, 1869._

REFORMED by a fair, enthusiastic little missionary. Send photos.--B.


1680.--_Tuesday, March 23, 1869._

ONE.--wfsz tpssz zpv izwf cffo tp jmm--tizmm cf hmze up ifzs zpv zsf
rvjuf xfmm zhzjo--op tjho pg tqsjoh zfu--wfsz ljve uipvhiut.


1681.--_Friday, April 9, 1869._

ONE.--hpu opuf--tibmm cf bu uif qmbdf obnfe po uifuxfouzgjstu pg uijt
npoui--up tbwf ujnd nffu bt tppo bt zpv dbo--xsjuf.


1682.--_Saturday, April 24, 1869._

POLISHED MARBLE.--The poor old man got there next day, and what will
poor Snow Mountain do?


1683.--_Monday, April 26, 1869._

PAX to ----.--Your imagination is fertile: your assumption delicious.
May God bless you. (Eyes, nose, and--chin.)


1684.--_Friday, April 30, 1869._

P. S. (120).--It’s no use temporizing, and like a cat, always walking
round a hot dish.--POLLAKY.


1685.--_Friday, May 7, 1869._

POLISHED MARBLE.--The poor old man got here quite safe, and I was
pleased when I saw him. Good-bye. From poor Snow Mountain.


1686.--_Thursday, May 27, 1869._

PESHAWUR.--In Memoriam Spring of 1859.--Aux fidèles fidèle.


1687.--_Friday, June 11, 1869._

“CAECIAS.”--573. 9340. 1287. 7134 . . . 2051. 623. 14. 33509. . 721.
1859. 0731.--9.6.69.--Pollaky.


1688.--_Friday, July 2, 1869._

“STEPHANIE.”--Not so fast, please.--Can you trust the whip?--Pollaky.


1689.--_Tuesday, July 6, 1869._

BIRDIE E. F. C.--E. F. F. C. Isabelle? Fur cap.


1690.--_Thursday, July 15, 1869._

“103.”--Ne manquez pas--9748. 11. 33. 360--answer.--Pollaky.
Paddington-green.


1691.--_Saturday, August 7, 1869._

“SIROCCO.”--Mistaken kindness! Have you forgotten the cavern?--Pollaky,
Paddington-green.


1692.--_Monday, August 16, 1869._

ILE: War krank, jetzt wieder in W.


1693.--_Tuesday, August 24, 1869._

POLISHED MARBLE.--The poor old man got all safe. I was surprised to see
him, but very pleased. He will stay a long time yet.


1694.--_Thursday, August 26, 1869._

ILE; Dank; noch leidend, folge Dir gern.


1695.--_Thursday, September 16, 1869._

“ZERO.”--5732, 14856. ´´21976´´ . . . 0356. 15-63. 5202.--Telegram,,
15-234--99415--1, 52, 14792. ´´311259. . . 715, 40. 3d visit. . 15. 9.
69.--POLLAKY, Paddington-green.


1696.--_Friday, September 24, 1869._

ONE.--vntkc xnt khjd sn ldds mnv hmrsdzc ne shld mzldc. h edzq h rgzkk
mns ad zakd sn cn rn sgdm. bzmmns qdlzhm hm okzbd mzldc ldds ymx vgdqd
xnx khjd.


1697.--_Tuesday, September 28, 1869._

ONE.--Kds sghmfr qdlzhm zr sgdx vdqd--he vd bzm ldds zs sgd shld
nqhfhmzkkx mzldc vd vhkk--h vhkk kds xnt jmnv--jhmc sgntfgsr zmc vhrgdr.


1698.--_Friday, October 1, 1869._

ONE.--Sghmfr bzmmns qdlzhm zr sgdx vdqd. Bzmmns bnld sn okzbd mzldc. Zkk
hr chr-bnudqdc. Sqtrs mn nmd. Jhmc sgntfgsr zmc vhrgdr.


1699.--_Monday, October 4, 1869._

TO STRAY BUZWINGS.--GRAND INAUGURATION of the APIARY. October swarms
will occur as per notices. Postulants will hive and buzz as directed in
September Circulars. For honey certificates apply to past grands. For
flight see further advertisements.--J. G. B.


1700.--_Tuesday, October 5, 1869._

AQMLJ hmd louch avttglgj tjlljq vwjq qjeyg tmwj xjhmiu ljttvir fdqjth
ein lqdj, viqefldqju avlg vtmwj neqtvir im otjjf lgel ivrgl.


1701.--_Monday, October 11, 1869._

SKZPCJJY. Bcyp Dyllw, kccr wmsp bgqrpyarcb dpgclb zclcyrf rfc ugjjmu
zwrfc jyic. Pmu slbcp rfc qrypq. Amkkml qcy spccxcq. Dcyrfcpucgefr.
Wmspq Zgawajc.


1702.--_Tuesday, October 12, 1869._

ONE.--vhkk ldds nm lnmcyx mdws--he xnt khjd--kds ld jmnv--cn mns qdlzhm
hm okzbd mzldc--ldds vgdqd xnt khjd.


1703.--_Friday, October 15, 1869._

ONE.--Xnt rzx xnt vhkk bnld he H khjd; vghbg knnjr zr he xnt chc mns
bzqd; he rn oqzx cn mus sqntakd xntqrdke.


1704.--_Saturday, October 16, 1869._

“ROLAND” 7543. 17, 359. 1946,--0751. . 287. 1. 51. 74, 6.--POLLAKY,
Paddington-green.


1705.--_Monday, October 25, 1869._

VNCSFMMB.--Efbs gbooz ep xsjuf epou lopx xibu up nblf pg zpvs tjmfodf
zpvss cjdzjmf.


1706.--_Wednesday, October 27, 1869._

AIXA.--The Horseman dangerously ill. Search pass leading to
Mountain.--POLLAKY.


1707.--_Monday, November 1, 1869._

AIXA (Telegram).--The Horseman slightly better. (Rome,
27.10.69.)--POLLAKY’S Private Inquiry-office, 13, Paddington-green.
London, W.


1708.--_Monday, November 8, 1869._

DIPLOMAT.--Telegram, “He has shaved.”--POLLAKY, 13, Paddington-green.


1709.--_Friday, November 12, 1869._

AIXA.--The Horseman is dismounted, and left in the cold. (Telegram
R . . . . No. 9th).--POLLAKY, Private Inquiry-office, 13,
Paddington-green.


1710.--_Saturday, November 13, 1869._

E. NEST., F. Nest., C. Nest., 22d February.--Snow on the ground, yet
’twas then the heart grew warmer. You did quite right. I am very
grateful. Listen, when another year dawns. Be very careful of yourself.
I bide my time. God bless you ever.--28 M. E 8, Letters.


1711.--_Monday, November 22, 1869._

A WHISPER. Empty pocket. As quiet as a mouse. At Xmas.--POLLAKY, 13,
Paddington-green, W.


1712.--_Thursday, November 25, 1869._

ILE! Endlich Nachricht Noch nicht wohl, immer Dein, bleibe es.


1713.--_Tuesday, November 30, 1869._

HAWKER.----Particulars rewarded.--CALL.--MUM.


1714.--_Tuesday, November 30, 1869._

BRAS PIQUE:--You are a dark shadow on the Road of life. I will not touch
it.--POLLAKY, 13 Paddington-green.


1715.--_Wednesday, December 8, 1869._

MARGUERITE.--Rien de nouveau. Look next year and the years following.
Write soon. Tout à toi.--FAUST. Fleurs qui vivaient auprès d’elles.
Dites lui qu’elle est belle.


1716.--_Saturday, December 18, 21, 23, 1869._

CURLY FEATHER.--Wet or dry, must I never see you more?--Disconsolate
Umbrella.


1717.--_Thursday, December 30, 1869._

CURLY FEATHER CANNOT TELL.


1718.--_Tuesday, January 4, 1870._

THE CRUELLEST WRONG of ALL. Not in the slightest hurt. Thought it the
most natural thing in the world. The cruellest wrong of all is not to
have a personal knowledge of Jesus; wrongs Him--wrongs oneself.


1719.--_Friday, January 7, 1870._

F. O. G.--Leave E for N January 7th. M any time, “if you care.” The
sooner the better. If there is not rain--Loyal à mort. “BLUE BELL.”


1720.--_Tuesday, January 11, 1870._

N B.--Read Jan. 7. Am so disappointed. Do you care for M--? If so, make
it soon. E. for N. Jan. 7. M, if fine, any time. Fidèle à mort.--“Blue
Bell.”


1721.--_Wednesday, January 19, 1870._

C. E. C.--Too late. On ne doit jamais aimer le bien d’autrui. Blaspheme
not.--L. M. L.


1722.--_Thursday, January 20, 1870._

L. M. L.--Courage, mon petit chou. Soyez ferme, fiez-vous à moi, et
soyez aussi silencieuse que les rochers au fond de la mer. Votre
Français est très mauvais.--C. E. C.


1723.--_Thursday, January 20, 1870._

THE GOSPEL “for the period” (αιωνιον)--“He that hath ears to hear let
him hear”--and nothing else can meet the exigencies of these perilous
times. Inquiring Churchmen are invited to send their cards to G. W., 90,
Stamford-street, Blackfriars.


1724.--_Saturday, January 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 1870._

NOT IN THESE BOOTS.--H. R.


1725.--_Thursday, January 27, 1870._

ALL very pleased indeed, with “several things,” especially cuffs.
“Little blue oddity” very pretty. Used daily by me. Did not like
intruding on them in their trouble, so send word thus. Let me know
maker’s name of cotton. Farewell, Birdie.


1726.--_Monday, January 31, 1870._

TO STRAY BUZWINGS.--In consequence of the destruction by fire of the
Star and Garter Hotel, Richmond, a GRAND FLITTING of the Order will
occur Tuesday, 8th proximo. Red tickets obtained only of J. G. B. The
Buzwing-hall, Jan. 26, 1870. By order.


1727.--_Monday, January 31, 1870._

TO STRAY BUZWINGS.--JAHARAH SINGH, P.B., will LECTURE (D.V.) at the
Buzwing-hall, on Monday, 7th inst. Subject--“The Buzwing Theory of
Flight.” By order.


1728.--_Wednesday, February 2, 1870._

THE ICE around the C. B. is very Rotten, and has broken up.--N. C. G.


1729.--_Monday, February 14, 1870._

GRACE.--His Eminence declares that, “of all the penitents he ever
confessed, you cap them.” C’est facile à comprendre!--POLLAKY, Private
Inquiry-office, 13, Paddington-green.


1730.--_Friday, February 18, 1870._

PEERLESS ONE.--“Il faut l’amour ou la religion pour goûter la nature.”
Scorching inside last cover will discover affinity. Pray respond. Yours
for ever. P * * * * R.


1731.--_Tuesday, March 1, 1870._

N. D. to PRIMA-DONNA.--L. B. H. B. A. Y. L. G. V. Y. Y. Q R. N. G. W. Y.
R. G. G. R. E. S. B. E. L. B. H. F. H. A. Q. N. L. A. V. T. W. G.


1732.--_Tuesday, March 8, 1870._

SECULAR (Rome).--Nos. 50, 52, 53 safe--51, 52 ominous fingermarks! 51,
struggled nobly.--POLLAKY, 13, Paddington-green.


1733.--_Tuesday, March 22, 1870._

BY the WATER, wishing for me, cruel fates that separate us. Why not
break the cord? All my efforts useless. For many -- -- J.


1734.--_Friday, April 8, 9, 1870._

FRANKENSTEIN.--Wjshg grws ikwh uja afv vp dnm eg ddwulqvv cobyihtf hxfq
ko jgspco lp dduf rh thkaatf rt twqqschh qnlv thiodvvug x iqs wjf
stfvgow vxli grt tdhfwa dpz oguwgs wq nh ubig ihtf wtvvv uh k xlum qgwht
hixf bqv xr ohxfu fbunjqi swu snfqvz rh mrxf lp zrws oguwgsv.


1735.--_Monday, April 25, 1870._

FRANKENSTEIN--oguwgs ugdhkwhf ddtpokoh ufwvmhf nb epxii zqmo ubuci kgsh
ko pcz vjbon j wtz kgs gkbna ukkswa tkgfwu shceb df vwsh qg lvt vcghvz
zjfq apx ufqf grt jw npbcm mg thtbl apx fbunjqi udmf fcsh qgbqvu jfdnuk
apx vshctxtf.


1736.--_Saturday, April 30, 1870._

HOTEL--VIPER.--Henceforth you will not find such easy victims.--POLLAKY,
13, Paddington-green.


1737.--_Tuesday, May 10, 1870._

WOOLOOMOOLOO.--SHOUT.


1738.--_Tuesday, May 10, 1870._

A. E. T.--All well. Will carry out the instructions. Will smoke only one
pipe. It may throw a light on the subject. Ahem! I am water-proof. Dieu
vous garde.


1739.--_Tuesday, May 10, 1870._

FRANKENSTEIN -- -- gqow vsb hpu rvenjf eputfvr-pqffqef zcjw hpu tfdupqu
j ikog dz fjbqef l qnlvuhf ur ijyg zrw grws vjfhvt rh jqvfugtwkoj dvw
ppw knsqswcow fjdtz bqvuu grt fygs gcsokoj cojgm qgyw ejsjfu vsxdoht.


1740.--_Friday, May 20, 1870._

UNKIND and UNGENEROUS.--Pertinacious.


1741.--_Monday, May 23, 1870._

E. R.--157, 345. 671 Le Diable in miniature, 8621, 4561,,., 751, 8417,,
00--Pollaky.


1742.--_Monday, May 30, 1870._

W.--Think of A. C.: Ux: M: En:--ret: W·d: to Dom:--A FRIEND.


1743.--_Saturday, June 18, 1870._

SHIPTON to MACDONOGH.--Come back. Are the husks so pleasant that for
them you desert the father’s house and bread? Walk in and take your desk
as though you had left yesterday; and go home with Minchin as though
nothing had happened. The Disciples of Jesus have no reproaches for
returning Prodigals.


1744.--_Tuesday, June 21, 1870._

WOOLOOMOOLOO shout rapidly and royally. Varmint all vanished. Impetuous
Popsey impecunious.


1745.--_Tuesday, June 21, 1870._

TARTARUS.--They appeared to be exceedingly jolly in their
mourning-coaches.--POLLAKY, 13 Paddington-green, W.


1746.--_Saturday, June 25, 1870._

CECILIA!


1747.--_Tuesday, June 28, 1870._

TRUBNER.--rpf l vilpl vq uzq or ybv vihtf d jboh tkqfw yjwj ukg elcsb kg
vq erpu zqsua ehcs sgu hpwhnpsg cxttw k farffv tr hvon.


1748.--_Saturday, July 2, 1870._

FOUNDRY was so pleased. Much dearer to her since. Happier by far. You
and hope. Intend only gardens. Love Birdie for your sake.--Boo.


1749.--_Thursday, July 21, 1870._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--Grenoble.--X.


1750.--_Friday, July 22, 1870._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--K. E. Y. has been boiling eggs in the crater of
Mount Vesuvius; back in Grenoble end of this month, at Hotel du
Commerce.--X.


1751.--_Saturday, July 23, 1870._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--Look at the _Times_; telegrams now uncertain.
Call at S----g, in Moravia, on the same line of longitude as Austerlitz.
Make all haste to Grenoble.--X.


1752.--_Tuesday, July 26, 1870._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--Telegrams of no use whatsoever. Stick to the
_Times_ for correspondence. Pass by the Tyrol and the Land of William
Tell to Grenoble. K.E.Y. is there.--X.


1753.--_Wednesday, July 27, 1870._

E. G. G. (en voyage).--Avoid the Land of William Tell; pass through the
Tyrol, over the Stelvio then by Solferino, Magenta, and the Mount Cenis
to Grenoble. (5th advertisement.)--X.


1754.--_Saturday, August 5, 1870._

LILY.--TIME FLIES.


1755.--_Friday, August 15, 1870._

WITH T.--You are merely her stepping stone. Arrived at T. B. G. B.
Infatuated. Stop it. Some day you will turn, and her ruin will follow.
She pretends you know all.


1756.--_Thursday, August 25, 1870._

MY Life, your S. Wife, Rosy.--Letter, telegram, fortnight. Are you
better? Unhappy. V. S. when. £25 gone.


1757.--_Thursday, August 25, 1870._

TO STRAY BUZWINGS.--The BUZWING CHESTER CUP THIS DAY. Fluttering at 11.
Banquet at 1. By order.


1758.--_Saturday, September 10, 1870._

MEDBERY and Mc Raye, attention! Julius stops at the Tavistock.


1759.--_Thursday, October 6, 1870._

PEARLS and GARNET.--Search large one first if practicable. Duplicates:
if first is not found it will not much signify.


1760.--_Saturday, October 8, 12, 1870._

I COULD not speak; it was too sudden.


1761.--_Saturday, October 8, 1870._

PEARL and GARNET.--The sooner the better. Not the small one, as that and
the next will be tried here. We cannot insure it, the last day you
mention. If large is not found yet, no matter.


1762.--_Monday, October 24, 1870._

FCTNKPT. cnh,. K. yknn. dg. ev. vfg. Itgcv. Yguvgtp. Fqvgn. cv. ukz. qp.
Ygfpgufcy. Pgnnkg.


1763.--_Thursday, October 27, 1870._

M. to DOLCE.--Will Dolce correct the shadow. M. cannot accompany it as
it is now.


1764.--_Friday, October 28, 1870._

E. rave ramap eh efkvc devh qn cqzv wahhav. Stc fqh hegu sfhavaih sf
cqzv eddaevefga? Tasvaii ja pexfap. Tera xgva hvzih. Iteww ewleci vaxesf
ei zizew cqzvi qfwc.--V.


1765.--_Tuesday, November 1, 1870._

E. qf dvqlw efp facv kexa. Devhc iyvqnzwqzi jzh kgh hta jveii. Devgav!!
Nexswc rave iqnhef pygxa moqx Waapi. Xega afozsvsai Hozihsi jvqgaf vaap
vaepc lefhap hq ilekkav lshtew. Tawd cqzvi zizewwc.--V.


1766.--_Wednesday, November 2, 1870._

DINNA FORGET! My silence forgie. Whistle at Christmas and I’ll come to
ye. Loyal je serai durant ma vie.


1767.--_Monday, November 7, 1870._

FCTNKPTCNH.--Uqtty yqw ctg knn ugpt cp cfftguu vjcx k ocy ytkvg gxgty
vjkpy ucetq in vjg itcxg ecppqv cfxgtvkug cickp ugpf hkxg rqwpfu vq
Fghtcy gzrgpugu cpf k ykun yckv. PGNNKG.


1768.--_Monday, November 21, 1870._

THE weight of this deep feeling is almost more than I can bear.


1769.--_Wednesday, November 23, 1870._

YOU could not speak. It was too sudden. I am a good rider. Green is my
favourite colour. I want money.


PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.




  Transcriber’s Notes


  The printer of the source document used (almost) identical characters
  for number zero and lower-case letter o, which may have led to errors
  in the transcriptions of some of the the coded messages. The same
  applies to some instances of capital letter I and number 1.

  Except as mentioned under Changes below, all advertisements have been
  transcribed verbatim, including inconsistencies, obviously missing
  punctuation, and obvious typesetting, spelling, factual or other
  errors, as they may have been inserted deliberately or may in some
  instances constitute (part of) a code. In addition, it is not clear
  where errors originated: in the original newspaper advertisement or in
  the transcription to or the printing of the book. The non-English
  advertisements in particular are full of (possibly deliberate) errors.


  Changes made:

  Advertisement headings (number and date) have been standardised to be
  entirely in italics.

  No. 12: ... eyes,.it is ... changed to ... eyes, it is ...;

  No. 127: Period inserted after first capital M;

  No. 261: comma inserted after May 1;

  No. 598: missing hyphen in mitge bracht assumed (changed to
  mitgebracht);

  No. 695: 1876 changed to 1856.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AGONY COLUMN OF THE "TIMES" 1800-1870 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.