VOL. XXXV.                                          NO. 2.


                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                          FEBRUARY, 1881.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                                33
    VALUE OF DR. TANNER’S EXPERIMENT                          34
    FREEMASONRY                                               35
    NATIONAL EDUCATION--APPEAL OF THE EXODUS                  36
    NOVEMBER REPORT TO EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE: Rev. J. E.
      Roy, D. D.                                              37
    GENERAL NOTES--Africa, Indians, Chinese                   38
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                      41
    NEW APPOINTMENTS                                          43


  THE FREEDMEN.

    GEORGIA, MARIETTA--Christmas Offering                     48
    GEORGIA, SAVANNAH--Beach Institute                        48
    ALABAMA--Missionary Work in Selma                         49
    LOUISIANA, NEW ORLEANS--Revival in Central Church:
      Rev. W. S. Alexander, D. D.                             50
    TENNESSEE--Methods of Revival Work in Fisk
      University: Prof. A. K. Spence                          51
    TENNESSEE, MEMPHIS--Sanitary Reform, Business,
      etc.: Prof. A. J. Steele                                52


  THE INDIANS.

    LETTERS FROM INDIAN BOYS                                  53


  THE CHINESE.

    HOW SPEEDS THE WORK? Rev. W. C. Pond                      54


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    BILL AND ANDY’S LARK                                      56


  RECEIPTS                                                    57


  CONSTITUTION                                                63


  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                                64

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D. D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Washington Ter.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D. D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Mass.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N. J.
    REV. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D. D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D. D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D. D., Kansas.
    Rev. W. H. WILLCOX, D. D., Mass.
    Rev. G. B. WILLCOX, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, Mass.
    Rev. E. B. WEBB, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. C. I. WALKER, Mich.
    Rev. A. H. ROSS, Mich.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, D. D., _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    H. L. CLAPP,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    A. J. HAMILTON,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    EDGAR KETCHUM,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. C. C. PAINTER, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

             VOL. XXXV.    FEBRUARY, 1881.      NO. 2.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


By the time this number of the MISSIONARY reaches our readers our
Annual Report for 1880 will be through the press. We shall be happy
to forward it to any of our friends who will send us their name and
address, signifying their desire to have it.

       *       *       *       *       *

This number of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY contains a complete list
of the names of the persons appointed for the current year to the
different fields where this Association carries on its work at home
and abroad. We commend the work and the workers to the great Lord
of the harvest, and to all those who utter the prayer He has taught
us to offer, “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, in earth, as it
is in heaven.”

       *       *       *       *       *

It is the belief of this Association that conversion is the proper
door into the kingdom of science, as well as to the kingdom of
Heaven. Our teachers and pastors, therefore, seek to bring those
who come under their instruction to a knowledge of the truth as it
is in Jesus, in order that they may be qualified to know aright
and properly appropriate all knowledge. We are glad, therefore, to
be able to refer our readers to letters from the field, in this
number, as evidence that revival work is going on at different
points throughout the South.

       *       *       *       *       *

Letters from our various stations at the South remind us, as we
would remind our friends, that this winter is a hard one for the
colored people, and that our missionaries really need more money
and more clothing to distribute than in ordinary winters. We quote
from one letter, which must serve for all: “As I write, the ground
is covered with snow to the depth of about six inches, the first
we have seen since 1876. By reason of the unprepared condition of
the poor people here, living in open shanties and scantily supplied
with clothing and food, this season of excessive cold is especially
hard to endure.” Contributions of money and clothing to relieve
this pressing and immediate want may be sent to the care of H. W.
Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are glad to know that the Rev. A. D. Mayo, one of the editors
of the _Journal of Education_, is making an extended tour of the
South, and will hold Teachers’ Institutes and deliver courses of
lectures in its chief educational centres. We shall await with
great interest the report of what he sees and learns during his
visit, and expect valuable suggestions from one who, to his wide
experience as an educator shall add an accurate knowledge of the
present condition of that part of the country.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the Annual Meeting in Norwich, the Committee on foreign work
recommended that a superintendent of African missions be secured
at once. The Executive Committee, after careful inquiry, made
selection of Rev. H. M. Ladd, a much beloved pastor of Walton, N.
Y., who has written:

“I hereby accept the position, praying the Great Head of the church
for His blessing upon the arduous work undertaken in His name,
looking for His help, without which we can do nothing, but with
which we can do all things. I shall endeavor to enter upon the work
of the Association on the 1st of February.”

We sympathize with his people in their great loss and congratulate
them on the valuable gift they make to the cause of the Master.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Southern Workman_, published at Hampton, Va., is,
mechanically, a fair and most creditable specimen of the work done
in the industrial department of the Hampton school; its editorial
management proves that men good for something else are devoting
their talents to negro education, while its columns show that
intelligent minds giving promise of future usefulness are being
trained in the school, and the paper, as a whole, gives an adequate
idea of the work being done and yet to be done in such schools. Our
friends who would at once have a very readable paper, keep informed
on all phases of the Hampton work, and contribute something to
support a most worthy enterprise, can do all this by sending to
Gen. Armstrong the price of the _Southern Workman_.

       *       *       *       *       *

“An Old Friend,” of Sag Harbor, New York, sends $30 for a Christmas
certificate of Life Membership for one of his friends, the
twenty-sixth Life Member of this Association which he has made. He
has earned the right to say: “Urge others to make their friends
Life Members, and thus add to the friends of the Society, and
increase the number of those who will take an interest in the good
work.”

Another “Old Friend” who has celebrated his eighty-fifth
Thanksgiving, sends $30 as a very suitable wedding present of
a Life Membership to his son’s wife, having made all _his_ own
children members.

These are happy suggestions for happy occasions.

       *       *       *       *       *


VALUE OF DR. TANNER’S EXPERIMENT.

This is not to be found in the fact that after all a man must eat
or die; this we more than suspected before the Doctor’s experiment;
neither has he settled how long a man may do without food; but he
has shown conclusively that starvation, as a mode of living, is not
economical, and that a life thus sustained is not worth anything.
It cost a great deal to keep him alive, and the utmost he could do
was to be driven out for a daily airing.

This lesson constitutes the sole value of his elaborate and painful
experiment: A man who is to do anything must be properly nourished;
plenty of good, wholesome food is cheaper than a diet of ice-water.

Good friends, we need not repeat the Doctor’s experiment to prove
that the policy of starvation is a mistaken policy, and is every
way expensive and hurtful. The question is not how long can a life
be sustained at the point of starvation, which is also the point of
utter worthlessness, but how much can a life properly nourished be
made to accomplish?

Our parable needs no explanation. Three hundred and fifty thousand
dollars is the least sum that should be named as at all adequate to
the highest efficiency of our school and church work. We can _live_
on less, but by so much as we fall short of this by so much are we
hampered and crippled.

The work we have to do is a work that must be done, and we, the
churches of the country, have it to do. It becomes, of course, a
question of wise economy in the expenditure of means. We point
again to the lesson taught us and reiterate it: Starvation is not
economy! The condition of greatest efficiency is that of abundant
life blood; and for the work of the A. M. A. for 1881, this means
at least three hundred and fifty thousand dollars.

       *       *       *       *       *


FREEMASONRY.

In the MISSIONARY for October, 1880, an item appeared, copied
mainly from an Atlanta paper, giving some statistics in regard
to the colored people of that city. It named the amount of their
taxable property, their industrial pursuits, and benevolent and
charitable institutions--the Odd Fellows and Masonic lodges being
mentioned among the number. Of all these institutions the article
quoted said that they have encouraged the people “to form habits of
sobriety and economy, and imbued them with feelings of charity and
benevolence.”

It has been thought by some of our friends that quoting this
remark was an endorsement by us of Masonry and Odd Fellowship. We
wish explicitly to deny the correctness of such an inference. The
executive officers of this Association have no sympathy with secret
oath-bound Societies, and the MISSIONARY, on fitting occasions, has
spoken plainly on the subject. Thus in 1873, the present Secretary
of the Association wrote, and, with the hearty concurrence of his
fellow-officers, published, in the August number of that year, the
following article:

“Attention has been called anew to this subject, by the refusal of
an ecclesiastical council at the West to ordain a young man to the
ministry, for what was regarded as a too tenacious adhesion to the
Lodge. Of the merits of that case we are not well enough informed
to pronounce a judgment, but it is clear to us that the growth
and power of Masonry is no light matter. The principle of secret
organization is unsuitable to a Republican government, and contrary
to the open spirit of Christianity. Among the colored people the
prevalence of Masonry would be a great evil--involving a waste of
time and an expenditure of money they are little able to bear, as
well as exposing them to undue political influences, and diverting
their attention from an intelligent and pure Christianity--their
only hope. Our teachers and ministers at the South already see
these effects beginning to appear, and deprecate them.”

Nothing has occurred since that time to modify, except to
intensify, these convictions, and the attitude and influence of our
schools and churches in the South have been wholly and decidedly
opposed to these secret societies, as many facts, if necessary,
would testify.

       *       *       *       *       *


NATIONAL EDUCATION--PREPARATION FOR IT.

In connection with the educational bill, which passed the Senate
last week, a word concerning the American Missionary Association.
Are we to have a national uprising of popular sentiment and
legislative action with reference to the education of all peoples
within our borders, but especially in the South? How signally, in
the providence of God, did this Association forecast the need, and
how wonderfully has it, these years past, been preparing the way.
If it had done no more, it has proved to all the world, past all
cavil, this--the cultivability of the negro, the practicability of
education for the poor blacks and also for the “poor whites” of the
South. Its Christian schools of all grades, planted here and there
in all the States, have led the way and established beginnings
of the utmost importance. These schools, by the sheer force of
their own excellence, and results so signal as to arrest universal
attention, have lived down the most desperate prejudices, and
commanded the most emphatic testimonials from all classes and from
those highest in authority. Never has a grand Christian enterprise
shown itself more certain of good results; never did a benevolent
undertaking more remarkably manifest its self-perpetuating,
self-propagating force. It has given a new complexion to the entire
“negro problem” in this country. It has successfully asserted the
right of the lowliest of all citizens to share in the benefits
and advantages of education. The Association, by the largeness of
its plans, the boldness of its project, the manifestation on the
spot of its work, by its public advocacy throughout the North, has
served to press constantly upon the public attention the exact
nature of the great emergency in the field of popular education.
When were ever before the wisdom of a measureless benevolence and
the audacity of a glorious faith more manifestly justified in their
results?

But will not the new Congressional scheme for promoting popular
education in the States of the South, render somewhat less urgent
the work and the claim of the American Missionary Association? By
no means! Just the reverse is true. Money alone will not educate
anybody. If the first need be that of more money, at least the
second necessity will be that of _suitable teachers_. Precisely
here, to meet this necessity, is seen the almost prophetic,
certainly the providential, anticipatory work of the Association,
getting things ready for the great stroke of truly national
statesmanship now proposed.

To say that the American Missionary Association _should_ have, at
once, placed at its disposal five times its present resources to
meet the new exigency, would be to make a statement altogether
temperate, considerate and reasonable. The opportunity is one that
is transcendently inviting.--_Rev. S. Gilbert in The Advance._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE APPEAL OF THE EXODUS.

We have kept a close watch upon this strange inter-State migration,
the causes of which will make a blushing page in the history of our
country. Its sad story should be a strong appeal to all who have a
heart to feel for the wrongs and sufferings of the helpless.

After many urgent solicitations, and repeated investigations, we
felt, despite all hindrances from lack of funds, that the time
had fully come for action, when we were informed that the General
Association of Kansas had appointed its Superintendent of Home
Missions, the President of its College and others, a Committee, to
confer with us in regard to this work.

The Corresponding Secretary and the Field Superintendent went up
from the National Council to consult with this Committee and
inaugurate such a movement as might seem best.

At Topeka, which has a large colored population, were found the
General Committee of Relief, and a committee of Refugees, whose
duty it is to take charge of arrivals, departures, etc., and watch
the subsequent course of these people. It was decided to purchase
lots in Tennessee Town, a suburb of this city, and erect a house
at a cost of $1,000, under the superintendence of our old, tried
worker, Rev. R. F. Markham, and we are glad to announce that,
despite the cold weather, it is nearly ready for occupancy.

This is to be the home of our night school for adults under charge
of Mr. and Mrs. White, of Oberlin. The pupils of this school
are excluded from the public schools because of their age, and
because they are necessarily occupied through the day. In it also
will be sheltered the vigorous mission Sunday-school which Pastor
Blakesley’s church has sustained, and which will be under charge
of Mr. A. J. De Hart, a young colored man from Washburn College,
recently ordained by a council at Cleveland, Ohio.

We have also located one of our Southern colored preachers--a young
man--in the Second Congregational Church of Lawrence, where there
is also a large colored population. Other points on this frontier
of colored population will be kept in view.

Of the $2,500 which this work will cost for the year the citizens
of Topeka have raised $700, and we have on hand a Kansas fund of
$450. This leaves still $1,350 to be raised as a special sum, as
this work is not provided for in the regular appropriations for the
year.

The Executive Committee, urged as it has been, both by our friends
and by the pressing need of this much abused and suffering people,
has ventured on this expenditure, confident that it is a duty which
must not be neglected, also that our friends will meet the exigency
by sending in promptly the amount needed.

“These children of the dispersion,” peeled and torn, stretch
out their hands to us again! Shall we not hear in their cry the
pleadings of the Saviour for these, the weakest of his suffering
children, and account this extra gift as but a small portion of the
double recompense due them for their redoubled wrongs?

       *       *       *       *       *


NOVEMBER REPORT TO THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

REV. J. E. ROY, D. D.

On the day after the election, I left my home at Atlanta to attend
in Memphis the Central South Conference and the Council for the
installation of a pastor, Mr. B. A. Imes, of Oberlin Seminary.
In the Conference I drew up the memorial which was presented to
the National Council in behalf of a re-statement of our Creed and
Catechism, urging the peculiar need of our Southern work, and
preached on the Lord’s day, once in our Second church and once in
the Second Presbyterian, lately that of Dr. Boggs. As moderator
of the installing council, I led in the examination and delivered
the charge to the people. Both bodies I reported daily in the
_Memphis Appeal_; wrote them up in a “Pilgrim” letter to the
_Congregationalist_, and gave their items to the _Advance_ and
_Christian Union_.

As a delegate from Georgia in the National Council at St. Louis,
your field superintendent nominated as assistant moderator Rev.
J. D. Smith (colored), of Alabama, who was elected on the first
ballot, and secured the appointment of Rev. Drs. Sturtevant and
Goodell to offer fellowship to the Presbyterian General Assembly
South, hoping for some incidental benefit to our work.

At Dr. Strieby’s request I went on with him to Kansas for the
purpose of initiating our Refugee mission, for which a lot was
bought and a house contracted for at Topeka.

Thence I went down to Paris, in Texas, to assist in the ordination
of two of our Talladega men, J. W. Roberts as pastor in that city,
and J. W. Strong to take the pastorate in Corpus Christi. Spending
five days there, I preached for our church in Paris, also for
the white Congregational church which I had organized six years
ago, planned for a new church site and building, and visited and
preached for our country church at Pattonville, twelve miles out,
arranging for the supply of this and two other little churches by
local preachers.

At Little Rock, Ark., I explored and found the fit material for a
Congregational church to be organized as soon as we can have the
money. In time we must have for Arkansas one of our first-class
institutions at this beautiful capital, which has seven or eight
thousand colored people, and which is the centre of a large
population of Freedmen.

In three days, at Tougaloo, I inspected the Institution; counselled
with the managers as to building schemes; lectured on “How to make
money,--by labor, economy, education, investment;” and delivered
a missionary address and a sermon, being permitted to rejoice
that day with the teacher in the conversion of one of their most
interesting young men.

The tour, which was one of 2,804 miles, occupied a month. The cost
of travel was $88.15, unusually large, even for so long a trip, as
I had to use the two great roads leading to Texas, which decline
the usual ministerial courtesies. With five nights of riding, and
only two of those in sleeping cars, with a steady push in travel
and in work, it was a wearying tour. The postage of the month,
$4.55, shows the amount of correspondence kept up along the way
with the “field.”

In contrast with the two railroads referred to, I wish to
report that I have in hand the annual _half-fare_ permits of
_twenty-eight_ railroad companies in the South, nearly all that
I have occasion to use, besides an _annual free pass_, held now
for two years, on Senator Joseph E. Brown’s road from Atlanta to
Chattanooga, which I use a great deal. Having received marked and
unvarying courtesy from the officials of all of these companies
(and, indeed, from everybody South as yet, without exception), I
count it a testimony to the recognized position of the American
Missionary Association in the South that these favors have been
granted so generally and so cheerfully.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


Africa.

--In South Africa, where Dr. Moffat waited years for a conversion,
there are 50,000 Christians.

--In almost every leading town in Egypt, from Alexandria to Assouan
on the First Cataract, mission stations have been founded by the
United Presbyterians.

--Four persons have offered to take up the mission work in the
field left vacant by the death of the Rev. Dr. Bushnell, of the
Gaboon, Africa.

--From their possessions in Algeria, the French are projecting a
trans-Sahara railroad from the Mediterranean coast to Timbuctoo, on
the Niger; and another from Senegal to the Niger. The English are
planning four other railways to the interior of Africa. If these
plans are carried out, new districts of the vast continent will be
brought within easy reach of the Christian missionary.

--_Mr. Arthington at a breakfast meeting in Leeds._--At a
convention of the Baptist Churches in Leeds, England, the following
minute was passed unanimously: “Resolved, that this meeting, on
behalf of the Leeds Churches, pledges itself to raise a sum not
exceeding £500, which shall be employed in supplementing Mr. Robert
Arthington’s gift of £1,000 for the purchase of a steamer to be
placed on the Congo River.” Mr. Arthington himself was present, and
delivered a most interesting address on the claims of mission work
in Africa.

--At the Livingstonia Mission Dr. Laws has already trained one
native of the country to be a teacher among the Angoni, and has
two others in preparation. Mrs. Laws has received a sewing-machine
from Glasgow, and has taught two native girls to work it. Money has
been introduced to the country, as have also the rites of Christian
marriage.

--On August 22d, Archdeacon D. C. Crowther baptized 27 converts at
Bonny, in the presence of a congregation numbering no less than 842
persons. One of the candidates was Orumbi, the rich woman who has
been holding daily family worship for all her dependents.

--Bishop Crowther was recently visited by a wealthy chief from
Okrika, a town of 10,000 people, 40 miles from Bonny, who informed
him that his people had built a church for Christian worship, to
hold 500, which was filled every Sabbath to listen to the reading
of the service by a school boy from the Brass Mission.

--Mr. Felkin has fulfilled his commission in seeing the Waganda
envoys safe to Zanzibar, and in paying a visit to Frere Town. At
the latter place, the missionaries have been instructed with regard
to runaway slaves, and the disturbances threatened recently are
likely to be avoided.

--There is said to be a marked difference between the tribes on
the eastern and those on the western shore of the Tanganyika Lake.
The former have neither images nor idols, while the latter have
both, in great numbers. An image is found at the entrance of every
village, and of nearly every hut. These are carved in the shape of
human figures. The art of carving exists in great perfection among
some of the tribes.

--R. M. Wanzer, of Hamilton, Ontario, is running his immense sewing
machine factory largely with gold received from Africa, from the
sale of more than 100,000 of his machines in that country. It
is not until we have seen orders from the agents of one great
manufacturing establishment like this, that any adequate idea is
formed of the extent to which our civilization is being introduced
into that dark continent. We may well hope that when the native
African is royally clad in long, flowing robes, made from American
prints, on American sewing machines, that he will be ready to
listen to the Gospel from the lips of him who represents these
material blessings.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indians.

--“If you want to civilize the Indians you must keep from them
schools and churches.”

If you want to civilize the Indians you must keep from them
intelligence and morality.

If you want to civilize the Indians you must keep from them
civilization itself.

The first remark above was made by a somewhat celebrated scientist
at a great meeting of scientific people in Boston, last summer.
The last two we simply intended to give emphasis to the first. We
think the biggest argument that we can make against this scientific
conclusion is to say nothing about it.--_Exchange._

--On the 6th of November, the Indian school at Carlisle, Pa.,
welcomed fifteen new students: four boys and three girls from the
Menomonees at Green Bay Agency, and four boys and four girls from
the Sisseton Sioux Agency; an exceptionally bright and promising
delegation. An Apache boy, captured by the 4th Cavalry in Arizona,
six years ago, has also been admitted to the school, thus making
the total number 212.

--Recently, at the Cheyenne Agency, Walter Matches, one of the
Florida boys, was married to Emma, formerly a scholar at the
boarding-school. The teachers of the school, where the wedding took
place, prepared an entertainment to which all the Florida boys
were invited, and the occasion is described as having been a very
pleasant one. The newly married couple are to live at the school,
where they are both employed, and we wish for them a life of great
happiness to themselves and usefulness to their people.

--On the 6th day of October, the Carlisle Indian Training School
completed the first year of its history. At a little impromptu
gathering of the school and its teachers and helpers, on the
evening of that day, the children were asked to vote for, or
against, continuing the school work. Every hand went up in favor
of continuing it, and some of the boys even stood up and held up
both hands. Speeches were in order. Everybody was happy and many
reminiscences were brought out with much incentive to continued
effort.

--That a great wrong has been done the Poncas, all parties agree.
Who is responsible for this wrong is not at present so important
as the question whether as Bright Eyes asserts, and the Boston
Committee believe, a still greater wrong is attempted in the effort
now making to have them relinquish their title to their own homes
in Dakota on the false pretence that it is their own desire to
do so. That the Hon. Carl Schurz, so far from being a friend of
the Indian, is the most unscrupulous enemy he has ever had, we
shall believe only when the proof is overwhelming. The delegation
which has gone out to investigate, goes with some very decided
convictions on this subject, but its report, whether favorable or
adverse, will doubtless be accepted as just to all concerned.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinese.

--Our Chinese brethren on the Pacific coast have organized a
society called the “Congregational Association of Christian
Chinese.” They have a General Association and several branch
Societies. Mr. Jee Gam, the Secretary, reports the following
interesting facts and figures:

The Central has 107 members, of whom 11 were received, and 11 have
been baptized, the past year. Six are now absent in China. Total
contributions, $265.55.

Bethany Branch, San Francisco, has 23 members, of whom 6 were
received the past year, and 4 baptized. One member expelled.
Contributions, $112.00.

Marysville--Eleven members; all received the past year. Two have
been expelled. Contributions, $98.00.

Oakland--Thirty-two members; 2 received, and 2 expelled the past
year. One baptized. Three gone to China. Contributions, $643.25.

Oroville--Six members, all added the past year. Contributions not
known.

Petaluma--Two members, of whom one has recently been received.
Contributions not known.

Sacramento--Thirty-two members; of whom 9 have been received, 5
expelled, and 7 baptized, during the year. Two have gone to China.
Contributions, $225.35.

Stockton--Nine members; 3 received, 2 expelled and 1 baptized
during the year. Contributions, $157.25.

Besides the contributions noted above, a general collection has
been taken, amounting to $137.50. In the effort to free Bethany
Church, San Francisco, of debt, the Chinese members and friends
of that church contributed $212.50--of which $30.50 given in
Sacramento, and $13.00 in Stockton, are included in the amounts
given above.

The total of gifts and offerings by the Chinese connected with our
Mission daring the past year cannot be less than $1,957.40. The
total membership, as above reported, is 222. Added the past year,
38. Baptized (including 2 at Santa Barbara), 26. Expelled, 10.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

HAMPTON, VA.--Twelve students united with the church on the 1st
Sabbath of January, nearly all of them on profession of faith.
Seven of these were Dakota Indians. It was a beautiful sight.

WASHINGTON, D. C.--The Lincoln Mission of this city has blossomed
into the Lincoln Memorial Church, which was organized by council
on the 10th of January with Rev. S. P. Smith installed at
the same time as pastor. The sermon was preached by Dr. Roy,
Field Superintendent, and the other parts were by Dr. Patton,
Dr. Chickering, Dr. Rankin, Rev. Mr. Grimke, of the Colored
Presbyterian Church, Rev. T. J. Holmes, of Baltimore, and Prof.
Fairfield. Music by the organist of Dr. Rankin’s church and his
superb choir.

Mrs. Babcock, of Newburyport, Mass., has commenced missionary labor
with this church with every prospect of wide usefulness. She is
supported by the W. H. M. A., of Boston, under commission of the
A. M. A. This mission, in its Sunday-school work, runs back to the
day of the Nation’s martyr, whose name it bears. It has done a vast
deal of good, which has been garnered up in other churches round
about, and now it turns to care for its own. It has been sustained,
as it is now, mainly by Dr. Rankin’s people. The colored population
of the district is 60,000, with only 3,000 outside of the city. The
National Capital carries its share of the “wards.”

AUGUSTA, GA.--Some of the colored people drew off from one of the
large churches to form a new one, and have been taking monthly
collections to build a church edifice. A little girl six years old
said she must have a nickel, for next Sunday was “throwing in”
Sunday, and she wanted to see that church built. Her mother said
she shouldn’t give her one, for she spent the last for candy and
she ought to have saved that. So she went off with a basket on
her arm, picked up bones and sold them for the five cents. Then a
friend gave her another and she remarked: “I believe I’ll put this
in, too, for _that church must be built_.”

MACON, GA.--There seems to be a growing spirit of harmony among
the members. The Sunday-school has had an average attendance of
116, and is in a good state of efficiency and progress. It had
a very successful Christmas concert and “fruit tree,” and its
other occasional concerts have been interesting. Mr. and Mrs.
Lathrop have done as much missionary work as they could, and have
distributed quantities of clothing, etc., to the poor, among whom
there has been much real suffering from the severe weather.

ATLANTA, GA.--It is refreshing to one’s soul to get into a live
prayer-meeting like ours last night. One good brother said, “This
thing what you call Christianity is no small thing. It starts
small, but it grows and grows and grows till it reaches out of
this world into the land we call Heaven.” Another faithful brother
always prays much, and especially for our school, and in his
remarks last evening gave as his opinion--“If ’twan’t for what’s
ben done on this yere block this city would be ten times worser’n
it is in ignorance ’n superstition. I hain’t no chillun o’ my own
and I dunno much about dealin’s with chillun, but I know dealin’s
with chillun ain’t no funny thing.” This evidently showed his
appreciation of our labor, and our hearts echoed his sentiments,
while we smiled at his quaintness and originality.

SELMA, ALA.--The school is larger at this time than it has ever
been during the same months since my connection with it. The
enrolment for the present month is 339. We have this year quite
a number of young men in attendance, from our own and adjoining
counties. A course of lectures, intended mainly for the parents
of the scholars, has been determined upon, and two lectures have
been delivered by the pastors of the Methodist and Baptist churches
respectively. Others are purposed for each month of the school year.

On Friday evening, 31st inst., there was a re-union of the Church.
The first hour was spent in preparatory exercises, for the coming
Communion service, after which greetings by letter were read by
the pastor and others, from those who had been connected with the
church as pastors, and absent sisters and brothers, all showing
a deep interest in the welfare and growth of the church. Then
followed remarks from those present, who had come from other States
and from Talladega College, giving us a description of their work
in the day and Sunday-schools, showing how much they appreciate the
advantages they have received and enjoyed, and are anxious to help
raise others to the same standard in spiritual and intellectual
advancement.

MONTGOMERY, ALA.--This is a week of prayer and we are observing it.
While the weather has thus far been very unfavorable, afternoon
meetings have been excellent; though not large as to number, the
spirit of them has been very encouraging. We are laboring and
praying for a “quickening.” I think quite a number are seriously
thoughtful. We expected to receive two last Sabbath on profession,
but the terrible cold and snows of the week prevented us from
having our church preparatory service on Wednesday evening. There
has been a very decided advance in intelligent appreciation of the
Gospel and in spirituality, within the past year, although no real
increase in numbers.

MEMPHIS, TENN.--The religious interest in the school has brought
great blessing and refreshing. On Thursday and Friday ten students
were led to give clear, whole-hearted testimony to an entire
change of heart and life. The school is moved through and through.
Scarcely a pupil of any age but is anxiously inquiring, as are many
of their friends outside. Some wonderful scenes and experiences are
given us and the entire work goes on most quietly, and, we trust,
thoroughly. We pray for the _whole school_.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEW APPOINTMENTS.

1880-1881.

The following list presents the names and post-office addresses
of those who are under appointment in the Churches, Institutions
and Schools aided by the American Missionary Association, among
the Freedmen in the South, the Chinese on the Pacific Coast,
the Indians, and the Negroes in Western Africa. The Theological
Department of Howard University is supported jointly by the
Presbytery of Washington and the American Missionary Association.
The Berea College and Hampton Institute are under the care of their
own Boards of Trustees; but being either founded or fostered in
the past by this Association, and representing the general work in
which it is engaged, their teachers are included in this list.


THE SOUTHERN FIELD.

REV. J. E. ROY, D. D., Field Superintendent.

  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

    WASHINGTON.
      _Theological Department, Howard University._
        Rev. W. W. Patton, D. D.,              Washington, D. C.
        Rev. J. G. Craighead, D. D.,           Washington, D. C.
        Rev. Alexander Pitzer, D. D.,          Washington, D. C.
        Rev. John G. Butler, D. D.,            Washington, D. C.
    LINCOLN MEMORIAL CHURCH.
      _Pastor._
        Rev. S. P. Smith,                       Chicago, Ill.
      _Special Missionary._
        Mrs. C. B. Babcock,                     Newburyport, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

  VIRGINIA.

    HAMPTON.
      _Minister._
        Rev. H. B. Frissell,                   New York City.
      NORMAL AND AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Gen. S.C. Armstrong,                 Hampton, Va.
          Gen. J. F. B. Marshall, Treasurer,   Hampton, Va.
          Mr. Albert Howe, Farm Manager,       Hampton, Va.
          Mr. F. C. Briggs, Business Agent,    Hampton, Va.
          Mr. C. D. Cake, Industrial Works,    Hampton, Va.
          Mr. J. B. H. Goff, Engineer,         Hampton, Va.
          Mr. C. W. Betts, Printing Office,    Wilmington, Del.
          Capt. Henry Romeyn, Mil. Dept.,      Hampton, Va.
          Mr. Thos. T. Brice,                  Hampton, Va.
          Miss Mary F. Mackie,                 Newburgh, N. Y.
          Miss Charlotte L. Mackie,            Newburgh, N. Y.
          Miss Mary T. Galpin,                 Stockbridge, Mass.
          Miss Helen W. Ludlow,                New York City.
          Miss A. A. Hobbs,                    Bangor, Me.
          Miss Lucy D. Gillett,                Westfield, Mass.
          Miss Jane E. Davis,                  Troy, N. Y.
          Miss Abby E. Cleveland,              Nyack, N. Y.
          Miss Myrtilla J. Sherman,            Brookfield, Mass.
          Miss Phebe C. Davenport,             Quaker Street, N. Y.
          Miss Sophia L. Brewster,             Brookfield, Mass.
          Miss Margaret Kenwell,               Mechanicsville, N. Y.
          Miss Anna E. Kemble,                 Camden, N. Y.
          Miss Emma H. Lothrop,                Pittsfield, Mass.
          Miss Carrie L. McElway,              New York City.
          Miss Julia P. Brown,                 Farmington, Conn.
          Miss Annie Emerson,                  Boston, Mass.
          Mr. R.H. Hamilton,                   Hampton, Va.
      INDIAN DEPARTMENT.
          Mr. J. H. McDowell, Chg. Workshop,   Hampton, Va.
          Miss Isabel B. Eustis,               Springfield, Mass.
          Mrs. Lucy A. Lyman,                  Hampton, Va.
          Miss Grace Harding,                  Longmeadow, Mass.
          Miss Lovey A. Mayo,                  Hampton, Va.
          Miss Cora M. Folsom,                 Boston, Mass.
          Mr. B. T. Washington,                Hampton, Va.
          Mr. Geo. J. Davis,                   Hampton, Va.
          Mr. J.P. Harding, Asst. in Workshop, Longmeadow, Mass.
      BUTLER SCHOOL.
          Miss Elizabeth Hyde,                 Brooklyn, N. Y.
          Miss Rosetta Mason,                  Hampton, Va.
          Mr. B.S. White,                      Hampton, Va.
          Mr. Orpheus M. McAdoo,               Hampton, Va.
      CLERKS.
          Mr. F. B. Banks,                     Hampton, Va.
          Mr. Wm. M. Reid,                     Hampton, Va.
          Mr. W. H. Daggs,                     Hampton, Va.
          Mr. Geo. A. Blackmore,               Hampton, Va.

    CARRSVILLE.
      _Teacher._
        Miss M. A. Andrus,                     Riceville, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NORTH CAROLINA.

    WILMINGTON (P. O. Box 207.)
      NORMAL SCHOOL.
        _Minister and Superintendent._
          Rev. D. D. Dodge,                    Nashua, N. H.
        _Principal._
          Mrs. C. G. Ball,                     Palermo, N. Y.
        _Assistants._
          Miss E. A. Warner,                   Lowell, Mass.
          Miss H. L. Fitts,                    Candia, N. H.
          Mrs. Janet Dodge,                    Nashua, N. H.
        _Special Missionary._
          Miss A. E. Farrington,               Portland, Me.

    RALEIGH.
      _Minister._
        Rev. George S. Smith,                  Raleigh, N. C.

    DUDLEY.
      _Minister._
        Rev. David Peebles,                    Dudley, N. C.
      _Teacher._
        Miss Alice M. Conley,                  Shelby, Ala.

    McLEANSVILLE.
      _Minister and Teacher._
        Rev. Alfred Connet,                    Solsberry, Ind.

    WOODBRIDGE.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. William Ellis,                     Southfield, Mass.

    BEAUFORT.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Michael Jerkins,                  Beaufort, N. C.

    LASSITER’S MILLS.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Islay Walden,                     Salem, N. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SOUTH CAROLINA.

    CHARLESTON.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Temple Cutler,                    Ipswich, Mass.
      AVERY INSTITUTE.
        _Principal._
          Prof. W. L. Gordon,                  Jefferson, Wis.
        _Assistants._
          Prof. Harlan P. Townsend,            Athol, Mass.
          Miss Clara Eastman,                  Wells River, Vt.
          Miss Nellie L. Cloudman,             So. Windham, Me.
          Mrs. J. F. Steere,                   Greenville, R. I.
          Mr. E. A. Lawrence,                  Charleston, S. C.
          Mrs. M. L. Brown,                    Charleston, S. C.
          Miss Monimia McKinlay,               Charleston, S. C.
          Mrs. Temple Cutler,                  Ipswich, Mass.
        _Special Missionary._
          Miss H. E. Wells,                    Middletown, N. Y.

    ORANGEBURG.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Thornton Benson,                  Talladega, Ala.

    GREENWOOD.
      BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL.
        Mr. J. D. Backenstose,                 Geneva, N. Y.

    ALMEDA.
      Mrs. A. S. Steele,                       Revere, Mass.

    LADIES’ ISLAND.
      Miss M. H. Clary,                        Conway, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

  GEORGIA.

    ATLANTA.
      _Ministers._
        Rev. C. W. Francis,                    Atlanta, Ga.
        Rev. C. W. Hawley,                     Amherst, Mass.
      ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Rev. E. A. Ware,                     Atlanta, Ga.
          Prof. T. N. Chase,                   Atlanta, Ga.
          Rev. C. W. Francis,                  Atlanta, Ga.
          Rev. Horace Bumstead,                Atlanta, Ga.
          Prof. Wm. M. Aber,                   Newark, N. J.
          Prof. Frank W. Smith,                Lincoln, Mass.
          Prof. A. W. Farnham,                 Hannibal, N. Y.
          Miss Emma C. Ware,                   Norfolk, Mass.
          Miss Emma W. Beaman,                 Amherst, Mass.
          Miss Mary E. Sands,                  Saco, Me.
          Mrs. Lucy E. Case,                   Millbury, Mass.
          Miss Carrie H. Loomis,               Hartford, Conn.
          Miss Mary L. Santley,                New London, Ohio.
          Miss E. F. Moore,                    Chicago, Ill.
          Miss M. K. Smith,                    N. B., Canada.
          Miss Rebecca Massey,                 Oberlin, Ohio.
          Mrs. J. F. Fuller,                   Atlanta, Ga.
        _STORRS SCHOOL_, (104 Houston St.)
          _Principal._
            Miss Amy Williams,                 Livonia Sta., N. Y.
          _Assistants._
            Miss Julia Goodwin,                Mason, N. H.
            Miss Amelia Ferris,                Oneida, Ill.
            Miss F. J. Norris,                 Atlanta, Ga.
            Miss Abbie Clark,                  Atlanta, Ga.
            Miss Effie Escridge,               Atlanta, Ga.
          _Special Missionary._
            Miss Lizzie Stevenson,             Bellefontaine, Ohio.

    MACON.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Stanley E. Lathrop,               New London, Wis.
      LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL.
        _Teachers._
          Miss Christene Gilbert,              Fredonia, N. Y.
          Miss J. A. Raynor,                   Syracuse, N. Y.
          Miss Caroline Park,                  West Boxford, Mass.
          Mrs. S. E. Lathrop,                  New London, Wis.

    MARIETTA, GA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. E. J. Penney,                     Marietta, Ga.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. Cosmo P. Jordan,                   Atlanta, Ga.

    AUGUSTA.
      _Teacher._
        Miss S. A. Hosmer,                     Ashley, Mass.

    ATHENS.
      _Teacher._
        Miss J. G. Hutchins,                   Atlanta, Ga.

    CUTHBERT.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. P. A. Dennegall,                   Savannah, Ga.

    FORSYTH.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. William F. Jackson,                Augusta, Ga.

    HAWKINSVILLE.
      _Teacher._
        Miss M. B. Curtiss,                    Chattanooga, Tenn.

    THOMASVILLE.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. W. H. Harris,                      Savannah, Ga.

    SPARTA.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. R. H. Carter,                      Atlanta, Ga.

    PERRY.
      _Teacher._
        Miss Maria Smith,                      Atlanta, Ga.

    ALBANY.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. William C. Greene,                 Albany, Ga.

    STONE MOUNTAIN.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. Eugene Martin,                     Atlanta, Ga.

    SAVANNAH.
      _Minister and Supt. of Missions._
        Rev. B. D. Conkling,                   Whitewater, Wis.

    BEACH INSTITUTE.
      _Principal._
        Mr. H. H. Wright,                      Oberlin, Ohio.
      _Assistants._
        Miss L. F. Partridge,                  Holliston, Mass.
        Miss Adelaide Daily,                   Fredonia, N. Y.
        Miss Georgiana Hunter,                 Brooklyn, N. Y.
        Miss E. H. Twichell,                   Saratoga Spgs., N. Y.
        Miss E. B. Willey,                     Andover, Mass.
        Mrs. B. D. Conkling,                   Whitewater, Wis.
      _Special Missionary._
        Miss E. W. Douglass,                   Decorah, Iowa.

    WOODVILLE.
      _Minister and Teacher._
        Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke,              Savannah, Ga.
      _Assistant._
        Miss E. A. Thompson,                   Savannah, Ga.

    MILLER’S STATION.
      _Minister and Teacher._
        Rev. John R. McLean,                   McLeansville, N. C.

    LOUISVILLE AND BELMONT.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Wilson Callen,                    Selma, Ala.

     McINTOSH, LIBERTY CO.
       THE GROVE.
         _Minister._
            Rev. Floyd Snelson,                McIntosh, Ga.
         _Teachers._
            Miss Rose Kinney,                  Oberlin, Ohio.
            Miss E. P. Hayes,                  Limerick, Me.

     CYPRESS SLASH.
       _Minister._
         Rev. A. J. Headen,                    Talladega, Ala.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FLORIDA

    FERNANDINA.
      Rev. Geo. Henry,                         Brooklyn, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ALABAMA.

    TALLADEGA.
      _Minister and Superintendent of Missions._
        Rev. G. W. Andrews,                    Collinsville, Ct.
      TALLADEGA COLLEGE.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Rev. H. S. DeForest,                 Muscatine, Iowa.
          Rev. G. W. Andrews,                  Collinsville, Ct.
          Prof. Geo. N. Ellis,                 Olivet, Mich.
          Prof. Ira M. Buell,                  Geneva Lake, Wis.
          Mr. A. A. Southwick,                 Blackstone, Mass.
          Miss Fannie Andrews,                 Milltown, Me.
          Miss M. E. Cary,                     Huntsburg, O.
          Mrs. Clara S. Rindge,                Homer, N. Y.
          Miss Anna K. Willey,                 Andover, Mass.
          Mrs. H. S. DeForest,                 Muscatine, Iowa.
          Mrs. H. W. Andrews,                  Collinsville, Ct.
          Mrs. Geo. N. Ellis,                  Olivet, Mich.
          Miss J. C. Andrews,                  Middletown, Me.
        _Special Missionary._
          Miss H. D. Fisk,                     Beloit, Wis.

    ALABAMA FURNACE.
      _Minister._
        Rev. J. R. Sims,                       Talladega, Ala.

    KYMULGA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Byron Gunner,                     Talladega, Ala.

    THE COVE, AND LAWSONVILLE.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Barbour Grant,                    Talladega, Ala.

    TECUMSEH.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Y. B. Sims,                       Talladega, Ala.

    SHELBY IRON WORKS.
      _Minister._
        Rev J. D. Smith,                       Talladega, Ala.

    ANNISTON.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Peter J. McEntosh,                Talladega, Ala.

    CHILDERSBURG.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Alfred Jones,                     Talladega, Ala.

    MOBILE.
      _Minister._
        Rev. O. D. Crawford,                   W. Bloomfield, N. Y.
      EMERSON INSTITUTE.
        _Supt. and Teachers._
          Rev. O. D. Crawford,                 W. Bloomfield, N. Y.
          Miss Emma Caughey,                   Kingsville, Ohio.
          Miss Ella F. Grover,                 Kingsville, Ohio.
          Miss Clara Boynton,                  Andover, Mass.
          Miss May Hickok,                     Kingsville, Ohio.
          Miss Ruby A. Smith,                  Belmont, N. Y.
          Miss Ruth E. Stinson,                Woolwich, Me.
          Mrs. O. D. Crawford,                 W. Bloomfield, N. Y.
        _Special Missionary._
          Miss Jennie Stevenson,               Bellefontaine, Ohio.

    MONTGOMERY, (P.O. Box 62).
      _Minister._
        Rev. O. W. Fay,                        Genesco, Ill.
      SWAYNE SCHOOL.
        _Principal._
          Prof. M. W. Martin,                  Worthington, Minn.
        _Assistants._
          Miss Jane S. Hardy,                  Shelburne, Mass.
          Mrs. M. W. Martin,                   Worthington, Minn.
          Miss Mary Scott,                     Amherst, Mass.
          Mrs. M. Hardaway Davis,              Montgomery, Ala.
          Miss Anna Duncan,                    Montgomery, Ala.
          Mrs. O. W. Fay,                      Genesco, Ill.

    SELMA.
      _Minister._
        Rev C. B. Curtis,                      Burlington, Wis.
      _Special Missionary._
        Miss Mary K. Lunt,                     New Gloucester, Me.

    MARION.
      _Minister._
        Rev. A. W. Curtis,                     Crete, Neb.

    ATHENS.
      _Minister._
        Rev. H. S. Williams,                   Wetumpka, Ala.

    TRINITY SCHOOL.
      _Teachers._
        Miss M. F. Wells,                      Ann Arbor, Mich.
        Miss Mary A. Maxcy,                    Hyde Park, Mass.

    FLORENCE.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Wm. H. Ash,                       Florence, Ala.

       *       *       *       *       *

  TENNESSEE.

    NASHVILLE.
      _Ministers._
        Rev. Henry S. Bennett,                 Nashville, Tenn.
        Rev. Geo. W. Moore,                    Nashville, Tenn.
      FISK UNIVERSITY.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Rev. E. M. Cravath,                  Nashville, Tenn.
          Rev. A. K. Spence,                   Nashville, Tenn.
          Rev. H. S. Bennett,                  Nashville, Tenn.
          Rev. F. A. Chase,                    Nashville, Tenn.
          Rev. C. C. Painter,                  Gt. Barrington, Mass.
          Mr. Edward P. Gilbert,               Nashville, Tenn.
          Mr. John Burrus,                     Nashville, Tenn.
          Miss Helen C. Morgan,                Cleveland, Ohio.
          Miss Anna M. Cahill,                 Binghamton, N. Y.
          Miss Henrietta Matson,               N. Bloomfield, Ohio.
          Miss E. M. Barnes,                   Bakersfield, Vt.
          Miss Genevieve Gifford,              New Haven, Vt.
          Miss Irene E. Gilbert,               Fredonia, N. Y.
          Miss Sarah M. Wells,                 Big Rapids, Mich.
          Miss Mary Farrand,                   Ypsilanti, Mich.
        _Special Missionary._
          Miss Alice Carter,                   Franklin, Mass.

    MEMPHIS.
      _Minister._
        Rev. B. A. Imes,                       Oberlin, Ohio.
      LE MOYNE SCHOOL.
        _Principal._
          Prof. A. J. Steele,                  Whitewater, Wis.
        _Assistants._
          Miss Laura A. Parmelee,              Toledo, Ohio.
          Miss Emma Rand,                      Whitewater, Wis.
          Miss Ella Hamilton,                  Whitewater, Wis.
          Miss Mary Magoun,                    Grinnell, Iowa.
          Mrs. M. E. Bunce,                    Clarksfield, Ohio.
          Miss Zulu Felton,                    Memphis, Tenn.
        _Special Missionary._
          Miss Hattie E. Milton,               Romeo, Mich.

  CHATTANOOGA.
    _Minister._
      Rev. Jos. E. Smith,                      Atlanta, Ga.

       *       *       *       *       *

  KENTUCKY.

    BEREA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. John G. Fee,                      Berea, Ky.
      BEREA COLLEGE.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Rev. E. H. Fairchild, D. D.,         Berea, Ky.
          Rev. John G. Fee,                    Berea, Ky.
          Prof. L. V. Dodge,                   Berea, Ky.
          Rev. Charles G. Fairchild,           Berea, Ky.
          Prof. P. D. Dodge,                   Berea, Ky.
          Rev. B. S. Hunting,                  Sublette, Ill.
          Miss L. A. Darling,                  Akron, Ohio.
          Miss Kate Gilbert,                   W. Brookfield, Mass.
          Miss Jennie Lester,                  Berea, Ky.
          Miss Alice M. Warren,                Berea, Ky.
          Miss Ida M. Clark,                   Berea, Ky.
          Miss C. W. Haynes,                   Oberlin, Ohio.
          Miss A. E. Trimble,                  Mt. Vernon, Ohio.
          Miss Maria Muzzy,                    Berea, Ky.

    CAMP NELSON.
      _Minister._
        Rev. W. S. Overstreet,                 Camp Nelson, Ky.
      _Teacher._
        Miss Juan Kumler,                      Oberlin, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MISSISSIPPI.

    TOUGALOO.
      _Minister._
        Rev. G. S. Pope,                       Strongsville, Ohio.
      TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.
        _Managers and Instructors._
          Rev. G. S. Pope,                     Strongsville, Ohio.
          Prof. D. I. Miner,                   Bavaria, Kansas.
          Rev. Azel Hatch,                     Oberlin, Ohio.
          Miss Kate K. Koons,                  Sulphur Springs, O.
          Miss Adele Holmes,                   Lee, Mass.
          Miss Fanny J. Webster,               Berlin, Wis.
          Miss Ernestine Patterson,            Providence, R. I.
          Mrs. G. S. Pope,                     Strongsville, Ohio.
          Mrs. D. I. Miner,                    Bavaria, Kansas.
          Mrs. Anna Hatch,                     Oberlin, Ohio.
          Miss S. L. Emerson,                  Hallowell, Me.

       *       *       *       *       *

  LOUISIANA.

    NEW ORLEANS.
      _Ministers._
        Rev. W. S. Alexander,                  Pomfret, Conn.
        Rev. Isaac Hall,                       New Orleans, La.
        Rev. Henry Ruffin,                     New Orleans, La.
      STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Rev. W. S. Alexander,                Pomfret, Conn.
          Prof. J. M. McPherron,               New Orleans, La.
          Mr. G. F. Jewett,                    Pepperill, Mass.
          Miss E. W. Dunklee,                  West Medway, Mass.
          Miss J. E. Strong,                   Westfield, Mass.
          Miss L. G. Merrill,                  Peoria, Ill.
          Miss M. M. Jewett,                   Pepperill, Mass.
          Mrs. J. M. McPherron,                New Orleans, La.
        _Special Missionary._
          Miss Lena Saunders,                  Boston, Mass.

    NEW IBERIA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. W. R. Polk,                       New Iberia, La.

       *       *       *       *       *

  TEXAS.

    AUSTIN.
      TILLOTSON INSTITUTE.
        Rev. W. E. Brooks,                     West Haven, Conn.
        Mrs. W. E. Brooks,                     West Haven, Conn.
        Miss Isabella Hunt,                    Richmond, Mich.
        Mrs. M. E. Garland,                    Austin, Texas.
        Miss M. J. Adams,                      Columbus, Wis.

    GOLIAD.
      _Minister._
        Rev. B. C. Church,                     Goliad, Texas.

    CORPUS CHRISTI.
      _Minister._
        Rev. J. W. Strong,                     Talladega, Ala.
      _Teacher._
        Rev. S. M. Coles,                      Corpus Christi, Tex.

    HELENA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Mitchell Thompson,                Goliad, Texas.

    FLATONIA AND LULING.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Thos. E. Hillson,                 New Orleans, La.
      _Teacher._
        Miss M. E. Green,                      Flatonia, Texas.

    PARIS.
      _Minister._
        Rev. J. W. Roberts,                    Talladega, Ala.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. Samuel B. White,                   Talladega, Ala.

       *       *       *       *       *

  KANSAS.

    TOPEKA.
      Rev. R. F. Markham,                      Twelve Mile, Kan.
      Rev. A. J. De Hart,                      Topeka, Kan.

    LAWRENCE.
      _Pastor._
        Rev. Henry R. Pinckney,                Lawrence, Kan.

       *       *       *       *       *


AMONG THE INDIANS.

  _Lake Superior Agency, Wis._
    Agent,                                     S. E. Mahan.
    Teacher,                                   Robert Pew.
  _Ft. Berthold Agency, Dakota Territory._
    Agent,                                     Jacob Kauffman.
  _Sisseton Agency, Dakota Territory._
    Agent,                                     Charles Crissey.
    Teachers,                                  (Under the A. B. C. F. M.)
  _S’Kokomish Agency, Washington Territory._
    Agent,                                     Edwin Eells.
    Missionary,                                Rev. Myron Eels.
    Teachers,                                  (Supported by Gov’t)

       *       *       *       *       *


AFRICA.

REV. H. M. LADD, Superintendent of Missions.

  MENDI MISSION, WEST AFRICA.
    _Missionaries and Assistants._
      *Rev. A. P. Miller.
      Rev. A. E. Jackson.
      *Mrs. A. P. Miller.
      *Mrs. A. F. Jackson.
      Mr. A. E. White.
      Rev. Geo. N. Jewett.
      Mr. Sam. H. Goodman.
      Mr. Samuel B. Morrison.
      Mr. Buel Tucker.
      Mrs. Lucy During.

    * Absent.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

A Christmas Offering.

The Sunday-school of the church in Marietta, Ga.--Rev. E. J.
Penney, pastor--has sent forward a Christmas offering of four
dollars, accompanied by the following letter, written by one of the
little scholars. One boy picked cotton to earn his dime. One girl
darned stockings for a gentleman to raise her part. We are much
pleased with the gratitude expressed for the aid furnished by this
Association in securing the new church:

                                   MARIETTA, GA., Dec. 9, 1880.

  Mr. Penny, dear sir, we have a nice little church in which we
  have a splendid Sabbath school, and we have 5 classes my sister
  is one of the teachers, myself and three little brothers attend
  the Sunday school and like it very much and we have had three
  very nice concerts which we injoyd very much, and we have a very
  nice pastor and we all love him very much because he is so good
  and kind, and we turn many thanks to that kind and benevolent
  socitey who assisted us in building our nice little church and we
  as Sunday school scolars wishes to mak that socitey a christmas
  presant which will be the sum of 4 dollars and we would like to
  do more but we are young and weak but we hope by the help of the
  lord to be strong some day.

                               from your little friend
                                                  ANNIE E. PORTER.

       *       *       *       *       *


Beach Institute.

MISS G. HUNTER, SAVANNAH.

We are receiving letters from our Northern friends inquiring if we
are asleep in Savannah. We repudiate the idea--we are fully wide
awake, although our work has not been represented recently in the
MISSIONARY.

The weather and sickness prospectus at the beginning of the year
promised to be very disastrous to our missionary labors here. Since
our return it has rained almost consecutively for three months.
Notwithstanding the unusual cold and rain, our school record shows
a larger attendance at the Beach Institute than last year.

It is astonishing to us teachers who come from the North, where the
children are sent to school clad in rubber clothing in inclement
weather, to see these boys and girls, so ill fitted to brave the
rain and cold, prompt and punctual in their attendance at the daily
sessions. In my department 70 boys and girls meet daily for secular
and religious instruction. Several of these children live at a
distance of from three to six miles, remaining without luncheon,
perhaps after an indifferent breakfast, the entire session. Every
day I see new proofs of appreciation in the parents and children:
they are beginning to realize the strenuous efforts of missionary
labor for their future prosperity and eternal salvation. What
more encouragement can we desire--looking into their eager faces
all aglow, and seeing the quiet submission at the lack of even
the necessary daily comforts that they may feed this great hungry
desire for knowledge?

We have a weekly Bible meeting held every Monday afternoon
immediately after school, in the Principal’s room, conducted by
Miss Douglass. The children are interested and the attendance is
large. With the Bible in one hand and the text-book in the other,
we hope grand results for the next generation of the colored race.
Also we have a woman’s weekly prayer-meeting held at various
houses. Would I could take my readers with me to these little
gatherings of sincere, earnest women, praying for the salvation of
their fellow-people; singing “hallelujah” for that freedom from sin
worse than the bondage of slavery. The church work is progressing
under our minister. These people very quickly discover when the
Gospel is preached in an able and sincere manner, and are attentive
listeners, worshiping the Lord in a subdued and quiet way; a strong
contrast to their former modes and habits. We are preparing a list
of the names and residences of the Beach pupils for Miss Douglass,
who intends visiting the parents in a friendly and religious call.
The extreme cold and distress, to a people unprepared for it, call
upon us for extra exertions. Miss Douglass distributes donations
judiciously, and thoroughly inquires into the needs of the
recipients. Pray that the Lord will continue the blessing of life
and health, that we may toil on in faith and patience.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Missionary Work in Selma.

MISS MARY K. LUNT.

I find my work constantly increasing; indeed there is no limit,
only a lack of time and strength. Really, there is work enough for
two or three more, whose whole attention can be given to it. I am
happy to say that some of our colored sisters are able to give us
considerable help in missionary work, and we feel confident that
more aid from the younger ones may be expected.

We have formed a society called “The Mission Workers,” the object
of which is to awaken a greater interest in home and foreign
missions. The proceeds of a sale which we are to have at Christmas
will be devoted to this purpose.

Since beginning work in the fall I have called on one hundred and
thirty-three families. When convenient, as in most cases, I have
read the Bible and tracts or papers to the women, also offering
prayer with them; have established a weekly prayer-meeting for the
women, some distance from the Home; also one weekly in my room, in
which white and colored lead by turns. They are precious seasons
to us all, and we feel that a blessing is for us. Several of our
members, whose husbands are unconverted, meet in their homes to
pray for their conversion. Friends frequently present requests for
prayers.

I have also quite a large class of married women and one young
man, reciting to me, in the afternoon, in the various branches of
common school studies, and could have a much larger class were I to
open a night school, but I dare not undertake that, my time is so
fully occupied during the day.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISIANA.

Revival in Central Church--English Evangelists.

W. S. ALEXANDER, D. D., NEW ORLEANS.

In my last letter the hope was expressed that we might have good
tidings to send you. God has graciously and marvelously answered
our prayer.

The month of November was a blessed month in Central Church.

The week of prayer in January has in other years been the beginning
of real, earnest revival effort. The revival seasons of blessed
memory have dated from this holy week. But the coming of two
English Evangelists, James Wharton and Richard Irving, during the
last days of October, called for immediate action, and we decided
at once to open revival meetings, and to engage in a united and
earnest effort for the salvation of sinners.

While these dear brethren were resting from their voyage, the
church came together and re-consecrated themselves to God. There
was a quick and deep apprehension of the necessity of personal
holiness and of self-denying service for Christ. Indeed the entire
month of October had been a month of prayerful preparation for the
movement. Printed notices were widely distributed, and Christians
went from house to house and invited people to come and seek the
salvation of their souls. From the opening night the meetings were
marked by deep seriousness and the evident presence of the Divine
Spirit. The method of the Evangelists was simple and honest. No
artificial means for exciting emotion were used. The Gospel was
preached in its simplicity, its purity, and its power. The sermons
were heart-searching, faithful and tender. The law in its exactions
and the Gospel in its provisions and promises, were presented
night after night. Brother Irving stayed with us ten days, and
Brother Wharton three weeks. After the sermon the Pastor took
charge of the meetings, and called the inquirers to the “mourners’
seats.” Special appeals and prayers were offered. Inquirers were
directed one by one how to find the Saviour, and to obtain peace
in believing. At some meetings Christians were permitted and
encouraged to speak of the love and preciousness of Jesus; and such
a volume of testimony! We could truly say, “Lord, it is good for
us to be here.” As I recall the sheaves that were gathered in this
glorious harvest I find much to thank God for. In two instances
both the husband and wife--all young people--were converted, and
standing side by side took the vows of the church upon them. Women
who had struggled with manifold temptations, and around whom the
wildest storms of sorrow had gathered, found in Christ a refuge
from the storm and the tempest. Young men with the hopes and
possibilities of Christian manhood before them, humbly, heartily,
and I believe, forever, took their position as the disciples of the
Son of God. When Brother Wharton was compelled to leave us to meet
an engagement in another church, the Pastor continued the meetings
for another week, assisted by Rev. A. N. Wyckoff, of the Canal St.
Presb. Church, Rev. Dr. John Matthews, of the M. E. Church, and two
able colored preachers. The fire burned brightly to the last.

The first Sabbath in December, thirty-one were received to
the Central Church on profession of their faith in Christ. We
hope forty-eight were converted in this revival. Some joined
other churches and more will yet unite themselves with us. The
meetings were thronged as never before. Crowds of young men
attended constantly. Some of them were won for God--others were
impressed--and with very many, let us hope and pray, the truth they
heard and the scenes they witnessed will prove to be “bread cast
upon the waters,” to be gathered in some future day to the glory of
God.

I think I see a quickened and deepened consciousness of right as
they read it in the light of His word, upon the part of professing
Christians a painful and unyielding anxiety with those who have not
submitted their hearts to God, and with many, a sincere longing to
come into the fellowship of the Gospel. If this judgment be true,
then how great things has the dear Lord done for us!

The Church now numbers 210 members. My impartial judgment is
that they represent a good deal of vitality, and are beginning
to realize the infinite willingness of God to bless them, and to
enlarge their borders.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

Methods of Revival Work at Fisk University.

REV. A. K. SPENCE, NASHVILLE.

You request me to give an idea of our “methods, success, and
experiences” in revival work in Fisk University. It is with much
hesitation that I attempt to comply with your wish, for it is
difficult, in a brief communication, to convey a correct idea
in such matters, and, also, one shrinks from bringing into the
foreground human agencies in a work which, if genuine, must be
Divine.

To understand revival work here, one must know the ordinary
religious work done in the University. Varying from time to time,
the following are the means of grace enjoyed by us. We have a
church which is, practically, a part of the school. There are three
services on the Sabbath--a preaching service, a Sunday-school, and
a prayer meeting. During the week there are school devotions in the
morning and family devotions in the evening, and also one meeting
for prayer. Upon all these attendance is required.

Many other meetings are held voluntarily by the students, conducted
frequently by an instructor. There is a Christian Association of
the young men and one of the young women, meeting once a week,
or oftener. The Society for the Evangelization of Africa holds a
meeting once a month, and every Sunday morning since the departure
of our missionaries to Africa, a meeting has been held to pray for
them and their cause.

Besides these stated meetings, there is a large amount of personal
religious work done in a private way, to lead the unconverted
to Christ. Opportunities are sought for conversation and prayer
with individuals alone. As employees of the American Missionary
Association, we feel ourselves bound to labor, as we can, for the
salvation of our students. We try to keep it before us continually
that we should aim at nothing less than their conversion. And we
seek to impress it upon all, that the Institution is entirely the
Lord’s, built with His money, kept by His care, and dedicated to
His service. We are sustained by the charities of God’s people,
given for the sake of His cause. We remember the way in which our
wants have been met, in the use of the Jubilee Singers and by other
means. The place whereon we stand is holy ground.

In “times of refreshing” the ordinary means of grace have been
quickened into greater life, and other means have been used as the
Spirit of God seemed to direct. The morning and evening devotions
have at times been turned into revival meetings, and extra meetings
for prayer and labor with inquirers have been instituted. In a few
cases the work of the school has been suspended and the day given
to religious meetings; but usually the ordinary work has gone on.
Persons under too deep conviction to attend to aught else, have
been allowed and advised to wait upon God, and suitable persons
have been permitted to wait with them. Occasionally scenes have
transpired not to be forgotten nor to be described--the tears,
the sighs, the groans, the bowed or prostrate form--and the after
unspeakable joy! As time has gone on, whether for better or worse,
the emotional has diminished. We have never sought to produce
excitement, nor have we sought rudely to crush it out when it came
spontaneously, but to quiet it off by indirect means, a thing
always soon successful. Doubtless clearer views of truth are doing
away with that frenzy of religious excitement which has so largely
prevailed, unbalancing the reason and prostrating the body.

We find it necessary to follow a revival with oft-repeated
instructions as to the doctrines and duties of Christianity. The
young converts need much loving and wise watchcare. They are
exposed to many dangers, and have nearly everything to learn,
except that they are the Lord’s and he is theirs.

Some years in the history of Fisk University have been years
of great barrenness in spiritual things, but none of entire
unfruitfulness. Yet long and sorely have we been made to cry unto
God, and humble ourselves before Him. Other years are precious in
our memories because of God’s peculiar presence there. Three are
especially so, 1870, 1873, and 1876; but space will not permit us
to enter upon them. Books might be written about them, but they are
recorded in God’s book of remembrance; there let them remain. Oh,
for a mighty and continual baptism of the Holy Ghost on all our
schools in the South!

       *       *       *       *       *


Sanitary Reform--Business--Industrial Instruction--Lecture
Course--Revival.

PROF. A. J. STEELE, MEMPHIS.

Great is sanitary reform, at least so say all good Memphians.
The Memphis of last November is not the Memphis of this, except
in muddy and broken streets and shabby street cars drawn by more
shabby mules. For these, “men may come and men may go, but they go
on forever.”

The business season opened in October, hopefully and more brisk
than ever before, notwithstanding that our population has within
the three years dropped from fifty to thirty-five thousand.

Merchants are reaping a rich harvest, and all kinds of labor find
employment and fair pay, interrupted somewhat for the past month by
severe cold and continued rains, which have also seriously damaged
the ungathered cotton crop. What would you say to _ninety inches_
rainfall in _eleven_ months? This is the amount reported by the
signal service observer at Vicksburg for this year up to December 1.

No one now thinks of Memphis as a failure; what with a unique and
almost perfect system of sewerage nearly completed, and what with
a growing wholesale trade and many permanent improvements, both
public and private, a new Memphis, indeed, must soon replace the
old.

School opened in October with a full attendance and every promise
of a most successful year. Our rooms for industrial instruction are
now finished and ready for use. The classes in needlework, etc.,
are organized, and in January a class or classes in cooking will
receive regular instruction, with practice in the experimental
kitchen.

Instruction will also be given to a class in the care of the sick.
It is a fact that the great majority of our pupils must continue
in very humble positions and circumstances; our aim must be to fit
them to fill well the lots that must fall to them in life; and
whatever positions they may fill, they must know how to build up,
and even adorn, homes that shall be very different from those their
parents have known.

The proverb runs, “A man far from home is near to danger.” The most
direct way, certainly, of bringing better things to these people,
and to the South, is through the home.

Our lecture course for this year is about made up. Dr. Magoun,
while here in attendance upon the conference and to visit his
daughter, our music teacher, gave the first lecture in this year’s
course. Among others to speak are Rev. Dr. Max Samfield, Jewish
Rabbi; Rev. Mr. Mayo, of Boston; Judge Pierce of the Circuit Court,
two physicians and other prominent professional and business men
here. Our idea is to have all the lectures, as far as possible,
deal with practical matters, in some degree according with our
regular industrial work. In the past four weeks we have been
greatly blessed by the Spirit’s presence with us, over thirty
of our pupils having found the “better way,” we trust. With the
exception of one or two sitting-room meetings, we have only held a
half-hour prayer meeting each day directly after school. Some of
the conversions have come with wonderful power and presence of the
Spirit, but all with quietness and assurance. We hope for still
more, and we are glad to have before us so much of the year with
its opportunities for training these “lambs” in the Christian life.
Most of them go with their parents and friends to the old churches,
where, too often, the weekly or occasional emotional outburst or
religious frenzy takes the place of real Christian growth and
experience. A number will join our church, two or three even
breaking away from friends and parents to find a more intelligent,
helpful church connection.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTERS FROM INDIAN BOYS.

Miss Eustis sends us the following letters from two of our Indian
boys at Hampton. She says: “Almka came to us a little more than two
years ago in his blanket and long shaggy hair, and knew no word of
English, and Tom Smith was only a little better off:”

  My Dear friend

  I want to speak English. Hampton boys I like very much and
  colored man massachusetts I staye very good I like very much very
  nice eat bread caks butter tea coffee milk and sweet appls and
  sweet potatoes and meat and chicken. I back my home I think take
  again work hard. I like work I like shop very much I know how
  make wheels. Mr. williams show me. I like him very much I think
  good to make wheels I back my home very glad so see my friends
  Indian boys and my father and sister and mother and brother. I
  like very much white man and colored man and colored woman and
  white woman. I stayed in Boston four day very good time. I went
  to christmas day very nice.

  Went I was Indian, I use to water my father horse. I used to hunt
  deer. I bring home my friend all eat. I use scout with white men.
  I fight Indian some no like white people they fight. dont fight
  now I come away my home to be like a man so I throw Indian ways.
  I like Hampton I work study I dont know I think like wild Indian
  have blanket and leggins I like Hampton I learn about God I like
  very much I make cart and shopse I like to work very much I do
  not know English talk or write I know little your friend

                                                           Almka.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Dear friend I would like write to you and tell you all about
  myself. I don’t known any thing when I first came to school,
  because I never school at my own home. and I like going to school
  at Hampton better than my own home. because I learn here more
  then my own home. And I like to work. if I learn how to work,
  when I go home. I think I must help some other Indians that dont
  know any thing about the white mans way or about Gods word, and
  I think that is best way to teach each other. and I known how
  to write. but I dont known how to read yet. I know how to talk
  englist but not much. And we are work every afternoon. so we like
  it very well. and school every morning. and we like it to learn
  a good way. We dont want be a bad man. because if we are bad God
  would not like that kind of man. so we want be a good. and we
  learn the white mans way now and we were past the Indians way
  about too years ago. and we take the new way. All the Indians boy
  and gurls very well. and doing well. and we had very pleasant
  time last summer over Shell Banks. we had work out there and when
  we done our work we used play out there. I wish to work out there
  a gain next summer. I heard that them Indians at my home learn
  some thing now. they don’t try to learn befor I come here, and I
  am very glad that they try to learn some thing now. and I wish
  that the Indian boys and girls come here to school and learn some
  thing for their people. now our lesson in Arithmetic and reader.
  and English too. and I like to study them very much. and I been
  here two years. so I learn some thing now. but not much. and some
  of the Indian boys went over Mass last summer and went back here
  again last oct. and they told us that the white people are good.
  because they are kind to the Indian boys and girls. that is all I
  have to say to you from your friend

                                        THOMAS SMITH, or NO-WATISH.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOW SPEEDS THE WORK?

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

_The Marysville Mission_, being viewed as no longer an experiment,
celebrated its first anniversary on Nov. 21st, at the Presbyterian
Church in that city. Its spacious and beautiful auditorium was
crowded, the Methodist congregation uniting in the services.
The exercises were very simple, consisting of recitations of
Scripture, singing, and an address by our helper, Lee Sam. But
the interest rose as the service moved on, till after a specially
excellent recitation of I Cor., 13th chap., and especially after
Lee Sam’s address, it burst forth in applause. At almost all our
anniversaries, held though they are in churches and on Sunday
evenings, this expression of interest takes place, unsought,
unexpected, undesired, but showing in a gratifying way that
whatever hard things men may say of a class of people, as a class,
of a race as a race, in the abstract, yet bring them face to
face with individuals of that class or race, trying to improve
themselves, struggling upwards toward intelligence and freedom and
Christianity, and they cannot refuse them the tribute of their
good will, their cheery God-speed. There were Congressmen in the
olden times who voted for the Fugitive Slave Law, and orators who
defended it before the people, who could not possibly have helped
wishing success to any individual fugitive if they actually saw him
making for liberty with his eye on the north star, and even giving
the poor fellow a sly lift that way if they had an opportunity. A
warm heart is too strong for a wrong head under such circumstances.
And so our anti-Chinese friends at Marysville gave us their
presence at our Anniversary, curious to see what could be done,
and before we were through bade us God-speed and helped us with a
generous contribution. On the day following, a well-officered local
auxiliary, like those at Sacramento, Stockton, Petaluma and Los
Angeles, was organized. The school is now established in permanent
quarters, furnished with all that is indispensable to a comfortable
mission house, and sets forth on its second year with promise of
good work and glad harvests.

_New Schools._--In this month of December, in which I am writing,
we have thirteen schools in operation, a larger number than ever
before. The Oroville school resumed its sessions December 1st under
the care of Miss Helen Ostrom, whose father, once a missionary at
Amoy, China, has taken pastoral charge of the Congregational Church
in that place. It starts well, and engages the interest not only
of the Chinese, but also of the better element among the Christian
people of that town, to a greater degree, I believe, than ever
before.

Of the two new schools, one is in Oakland, occupying an apartment
kindly granted for the purpose by the Pacific Theological Seminary,
situated about 1¼ miles from the school already sustained in
rooms supplied by the First Congregational Church. It is near the
Plymouth Avenue Church, and will, we trust, be taken under its
wing. Miss Maria W. Bye is its faithful and devoted teacher. The
other new school is at Point Pedro, the Chinese fishing village
of which some account was given in the December MISSIONARY. On
visiting the place I found it to consist of six or seven distinct
villages situated on the shore of little coves, and separated from
each other by points of greater or less altitude jutting out boldly
into the Bay. The population, estimated at about 600, is thus
divided into little groups of, say, 100 people each; the distance
from the nearest to the most remote being not less than two miles.
It calls for _two_ schools, and affording, as it does, a field for
missionary service among women and children as well as men, it
needs at least one teacher able to give not only evenings, but the
daytime also to the work. We are at present feeling our way under
conditions quite different from those in any of our older schools,
praying that the wisdom from above may save us from the mistakes
into which our own unaided counsel would plunge us certainly; and
that, as we learn how to reach these dark and scattered multitudes,
we may have means adequate to the task. “As thy days so shall thy
strength be.”

_The Money Question._--Many who count themselves specially prudent
find no room for the exercise of faith in matters of cash. But I
have not so read either the word or the providence of God. We are
walking by faith in laying out our missionary work for this new
year. In place of the $1,610.70 received last year over and above
the regular appropriation from the treasury in New York, we rely
upon raising $5,000 this year. We cannot do the work waiting to be
done, we cannot answer the Master’s call with any less sum than
that. Every cent of it can be used without extravagance. Indeed we
can practice a more effective economy on an income of $10,000 per
annum than on one of $7,600. A certain amount is necessary even
to _start_. There are some heavy expenses from which there is no
escape however we may cut down the work, unless, indeed, we cut its
life out altogether. These would not be materially increased even
though the service rendered were increased three-fold. We look,
therefore, first to the Master himself, and then to his people,
whom he constitutes his almoners, to make up this $5,000. Humbly
trusting to his faithfulness, we expect it to come, and we venture
forward on that expectation. Already, from a helper in the “far
East” comes an unsolicited gift of $100, and a pledge of another
$100 if, thereby, this $5,000 can be secured. Already I seem to
see in the near future full twenty-five or even many more of such
$100 shares taken. Where shall I find the remainder? Are there no
readers of the MISSIONARY who can aid me to answer this question?
“Inasmuch as ye have done it even to one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me.”

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


BILL AND ANDY’S LARK.

MRS. HARRIET A. CHEEVER

“I say, Andy! let’s go hear Sam Andrews talk to-night; doesn’t cost
anything to go in, but they take a c’llection after he’s through,
so we can put ten cents in the box, and after meetin’ we can buy
some nuts and candy, and have quite a little lark; come on, will
you?”

“Sam Andrews!” said Andy, “what, that colored boy that’s been off
to the sem’nary?”

“Yes; they say he talks splendid.”

“How much money you got?” queried Andy.

“Fifty cents,” answered Bill. “I’ll take forty cents along
to-night--earned it all, you know, so it’s mine to do what I please
with; I’ll put ten cents in the box,--oughter help Sam a little,
you know,--then I’ll spend, say twenty cents for goodies, and have
ten cents in my pocket, and leave ten cents at home; must save a
little, you know; how much you got?”

“I’ve got fifty cents too;” said Andy. “Yes, I’ll go. Father won’t
object to my goin’ to hear Sam, and of course we won’t stay out
very late.”

Bill and Andy were boy chums, who at the present speaking were
roosting on a picket fence, in that seemingly comfortable manner
in which bipeds of their species seem perfectly capable of doing.
They were good-hearted, industrious boys, but rather thoughtless at
times, and the parents of both often felt troubled that they seemed
to care so little for “book learning.”

Sure enough, when the Town Hall was filling with a half interested,
half curious audience to hear Sam Andrew’s story, among the rest,
on the back seats, sat Bill and Andy.

Pretty soon Sam began; he told how, through struggles and
hardships, want and poverty, he had persisted in gaining an
entrance into the seminary.

All at once, Bill swallowed hard, then whispered to his companion,

“I say, Andy, let’s give Sam twenty cents instead of ten!”

“Yes, let’s,” readily agreed Andy.

Sam went on; he told how fever broke out among some of the seminary
boys, and he and a few others spent the last cent they could raise
in getting medicines, and alas! a coffin in more than one case.

This time Bill gulped down a great sob, and whispered brokenly,

“Andy, old boy, let’s make it thirty cents; a heart of stone
couldn’t stan’ that!”

“Yes, so we will,” gasped Andy, with shining eyes.

Sam continued: he told of selling the coat off his back, sooner
than give up his precious opportunities for studying and improving
his mind.

Here Bill gave Andy a nudge, and whispered desperately,

“I’m goin’ the whole forty, Andy; what’s a selfish old lark of nuts
and candy, I’d like to know, for a well fed cove like me? I’ll help
Sam the whole figger,--cookies if I won’t!”

“Feel as if I’d been a pig all my life,” whimpered Andy, as Sam
went on with his piteous story of painful perseverance and hard
endurance. All at once Bill began edging off the settee, but he
stopped to whisper again,

“Say, Andy, I’m going home as tight as ever I can leg it after that
other ten cents; be back in a minute;” and before Andy could reply
he was off: in a few moments he was back again, but where was Andy?

A moment later Andy entered softly, and taking his seat by Bill,
opened his hand, in which was _his_ last ten cent piece.

But it might have done one real good to have seen the peculiar
shine in the eyes of the generous boys, as their willing offerings
rattled down into the well-filled box which was passed around for
the collection at the close of the meeting.

And after all, that was not the best of it, for on the way home,
instead of the “selfish lark” so cheerfully given up, the boys had
a good sensible talk, in which they agreed that it was shameful,
the way in which they had neglected their studies, and here was a
poor colored boy, who had suffered “all a feller _could_ suffer and
pull through,”--as Andy remarked with boy-like earnestness,--for
the knowledge they, in their favored freedom from care and
privation, had hardly thought worth possessing, much less toiling
for.

Bill and Andy’s parents silently wondered what had come over their
boys, that all at once they grew so thoughtful and studious; but
the boys knew what had come over them, and they also knew why it
was that whenever they earned any money, a part was saved out from
the rest for charitable purposes.

“Makes a feller feel quite like a man to help some one else along a
little besides himself, doesn’t it Bill, old boy?” Andy asked one
day.

And Bill replied,

“Guess it does! We can’t do much, but even our little is worth
givin’, ’specially when a cove saves it himself: guess our
Sunday-school teacher was right; let’s see, what was that verse
she said?--‘It is more blesseder to--to give away a part, than to
receive all inter yourself,’--I believe that was about it, and _so_
much better than wastin’ it on a senseless lark!”

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR DECEMBER, 1880.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $253.87.

    Bangor. Central Ch. Sab. Sch.                            $25.00
    Brewer. John Holyoke                                       7.30
    Brownville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.82
    Farmington Falls. Cong. Ch.                                4.03
    Fryeburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               7.30
    Gorham. Cong. Ch. to const. F. P. IRISH, L. M.            27.40
    Hampden. Cong. Ch.                                         6.20
    Litchfield Corner. Cong. Ch.                              10.00
    New Sharon. Cong. Ch.                                      3.80
    North Vassalborough. Joseph White                         10.00
    Noridgewock. Cong. Ch., $30; Rev. B. T., $1.50
      _for A. M._                                             31.50
    Portland. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., $54.02;
      Mrs. David Patten, $5                                   59.02
    Rockland. Miss S. S.                                       0.50
    Scarborough. “A Friend in Cong. Ch.”                      30.00
    Saco. D. Jordan, $2; Miss C. J. B. and Miss G.
      L. B., $1.                                               3.00
    Searsport. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       12.00
    South Berwick. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
      C., _for Wilmington, N. C._
    South Berwick. Friends, Bbl. of C. _for Selma.
      Ala._
    Topsham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Union. F. V. N. and Mrs. H. R. B., 50c. each               1.00
    West Falmouth. Ladies of Second Ch., Bbl. of
      C. _for Selma, Ala._


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $522.53.

    Acworth. Dea. D. C. A.                                     0.50
    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                3.75
    Concord. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $51.20;
      Mrs. M. S. S., $1; “A Friend,” $1                       53.20
    Concord. W. H. Pitman, _for Chinese M._                    2.00
    Colebrook. “Christmas Presents;” E., $1; C.,
      $1; and L., 50c                                          2.50
    Exeter. “Friends in the North,” $60; Second
      Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., $20; _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._, by Rev. G. E. Hill                       80.00
    Exeter. “Friend”                                          30.00
    Francestown. Leonard Spaulding, $5; A. F., $1              6.00
    Greenland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             16.25
    Hanover. Mrs. E. M. Y.                                     1.00
    Harrisville. D. Farwell                                    5.00
    Hillsborough Bridge. Mrs. N. T. and Mrs. J.
      G., $1 ea.                                               2.00
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.40
    Keene. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                              42.58
    Keene. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of First Ch.,
      $2.50, and Bbl. of C. _for McIntosh, Ga._                2.50
    Lancaster. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $15; Mrs. E. M.
      K., 50c                                                 15.50
    Lyme. S. W. Balch                                         10.00
    Manchester. Franklin St. Church, $69.57; First
      Cong. Ch., $60.43                                      130.00
    Nashua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          19.40
    Orfordville. Mrs. A. E.                                    0.50
    Pelham. Mrs. Putnam                                        5.00
    Plymouth. W. H. R.                                         0.50
    Salem. Individuals, by Rev. G. A. Perkins                  2.00
    Stratham. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $20.09; Mrs.
      Martha Thompson, $5                                     25.09
    Sullivan. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         2.50
    Swanzey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.00
    Tilton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                30.00
    West Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          11.68
    Wolfborough. First Cong. Ch.                              10.68


  VERMONT, $1,161.49.

    Brattleborough. Cong. Ch., $2; H. H., $1                   3.00
    Brookfield. W. M. G.                                       0.50
    Castleton. Mrs. L. J. S.                                   1.00
    East Poultney. A. D. Wilcox                                5.00
    Hartford. Cong. Ch., $145.83, and Sab. Sch.,
      $6.75                                                  152.58
    Hubbardton. Mrs. James Flagg                               2.00
    Montpelier. Bethany Cong. Ch., $20.05; Bethany
      Ch. Sab. Sch., $6.66                                    26.71
    Newport. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $13; “S. J. B.,”
      $2                                                      15.00
    Peacham. Cong. Ch. and Soc                                38.66
    Pittsfield. H. O. G.                                       0.50
    Pittsford. Mrs. N. P. Humphrey                            10.00
    Randolph. Mrs. I. N.                                       2.00
    Rutland. Cong. Ch.                                       192.54
    Saint Johnsbury. South Cong. Ch.                          25.00
    South Londonderry. Miss N. C.                              1.00
    Stowe. Cong. Ch.                                          40.00
    Swanton. HERVEY STONE, to const. himself,
      HENRY M. STONE and HARRIET M. STONE, L. M.’s           100.00
    West Charleston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       22.50
    West Fairlee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              9.00
    Wells River. C. W. Eastman, $5; H. D., 50c                 5.50
    Woodstock. Wm. S. Lewis and Wife                           4.00
                                                          —————————
                                                            $661.49
    LEGACY--Waitsfield. Miss Mehetable Rider, by
      H. N. Bushnell                                         500.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $1,161.49


  MASSACHUSETTS, $7,380.74.

    Amesbury and Salisbury. Union Evan. Ch. and
      Soc.                                                    11.00
    Amhest. Miss M. H. Scott, _for Tougaloo U._,
      and to const. MISS K. K. KOONS, L. M.                   30.00
    Amherst. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Andover. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., $100; Rev.
      W. L. R., 50c                                          100.50
    Andover. Miss Susie W. Smith, _for Student
      Aid, Straight U._                                       50.00
    Ashby. Rev. G. S. S.                                       0.50
    Ashfield. Mrs. Alvan Perry, Bbl. of C.;
      Ladies, $1.57 _for freight_                              1.57
    Ashburnham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      26.36
    Athol. Cong. Ch., _for Charleston, S. C._                 10.00
    Ballard Vale. J. L.                                        1.00
    Barre. C. B. R.                                            1.00
    Belchertown. Mrs. D. B. B.                                 0.50
    Blandford. Cong. Ch.                                       7.00
    Boston. Mount Vernon Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $426.23; Walnut Ave. Cong. Ch., $103.14;
      Union Cong. Ch. and Soc., $96.46; “A
      Friend,” $10; J. H. D., $1; Mrs. S., $1, G.
      E. K., 50c; Mrs. S. A., 50c                            638.83
    Boston Highlands. Miss D.                                  0.50
    Boylston Centre. Ladies, Bbl. of C.
    Bradford. Ladies Bbl. of C.
    Brimfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       8.82
    Brookline. J. P. P.                                        0.50
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc., $8.48; G.
      F. Kendall, $5                                          13.48
    Charlestown. Winthrop Cong. Ch.                           69.41
    Charlton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 14.36
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $79.90; “A
      Friend,” $2; “A Friend,” $2                             83.90
    Chicopee. Cong. Ch.                                       27.31
    Conway. Miss M. A. W.                                      0.50
    Cotuit. Union Ch. and Soc.                                10.00
    Cummington. “A few Friends”                                8.00
    Douglass. A. M. H.                                         0.50
    Easthampton. Payson Cong. Ch., $429.10; Payson
      Cong. Sab. Sch., $50; First Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      $25                                                    504.10
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               61.83
    Fall River. Mrs. R. B.                                     1.00
    Fitchburgh. Cal. Cong. Ch., 161.40; Mrs. H.
      H., $1                                                 162.40
    Framingham. Mrs. Mann, of Plymouth Ch., $4,
      _for Freight_; S. H., 51c                                4.51
    Freetown. “A Friend,” $10; Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $3.68                                                   13.68
    Grantville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            13.78
    Groton. Elizabeth Farnsworth                              10.00
    Harwich. Cong. Ch.                                        12.40
    Harwichport. Leonard Robbins                              10.60
    Haverhill. North Cong. Ch. and Soc., $185;
      Mrs. Mary B. Jones, $10; Mrs. J. B. Hall,
      $2; J. U., $1                                          198.00
    Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            7.25
    Hinsdale. “Friend”                                        51.00
    Holbrook. Mrs. C. S. Holbrook, Bbl. of C.,
      _for Savannah, Ga._, and $5 _for freight_                5.00
    Holden. C. T. W.                                           1.00
    Holliston. Ladies Benev. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
      Two Bbl’s C. and $1.10 _for freight, for
      Savannah, Ga._                                           1.10
    Ipswich. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          4.50
    Jamaica Plain. “Friend”                                    5.00
    Lakeville. Betsey Kinsley                                  2.00
    Lexington. Hancock Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      5.66
    Lowell. Geo. F. Willey, $5.20; Mrs. A. S.
      Cutler, $5; Mrs. S. R. P., 50c                          10.70
    Ludlow. Cong. Ch.                                         34.55
    Lynn. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            21.67
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          37.08
    Marlborough. T. B. P.                                      1.00
    Maplewood. Ladies, 2 Bbl’s. of C., _for
      Savannah, Ga._
    Maplewood. Mrs. J. C. F                                    0.50
    Mattapoisett. A. C.                                        1.00
    Matfield. Mrs. S. D. Shaw, $2.50, _for
      Refugees_ and 50c., _for Mag._                           3.00
    Medfield. Mrs. G. F.                                       0.50
    Medford. S. J. B.                                          0.50
    Milford. Individuals                                       2.50
    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., $51.11;
      M. D. Garfield, $5                                      56.11
    Millbury. First. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      furnishing a room, Atlanta U._                          25.00
    Monson. Cong. Ch.                                         35.65
    New Bedford. Miss E. B. Dickinson, $50; “A
      Friend,” $20                                            70.00
    Newburyport. Whitefield Cong. Ch., $6.67; Mrs.
      J. B., $1; Mrs. L. H., $1                                8.67
    Newburyport. J. C. Cleveland, Bbl. of C. _for
      Tougaloo U._
    Newburyport. L. B. Pert, Bbl. of C. _for
      Refugees_
    Newton. Mrs. C. F. R.                                      0.50
    Newton Centre. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $18.03; J. W., 50c; Mrs. M. B. Furber, $2               20.53
    Newton Highlands. Mrs. G. G. Phipps, Bbl. of
      C. _for Atlanta, Ga._
    Northborough. Mrs. A. E. D. F.                             0.50
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $50; Union Cong. Ch., $7.50; R. H. B., 50c.             58.00
    Northford. Cong. Ch.                                      24.51
    Norfolk. Miss L. W.                                        0.50
    Norwood. Mrs. H. N. Fuller, _for Indian M._                2.00
    Orleans. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  10.00
    Peabody. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             75.00
    Phillipston. A. & T. Ward                                  5.00
    Prescott. Mrs. A. H. B.                                    0.50
    Raynham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         17.08
    Reading. Bethesda Ch. Sab. Sch.                            6.84
    Rockport. John Parsons                                     3.00
    Royalston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        2.75
    Salem. Crombie St. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      40.00
    Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc. ad’l                       10.00
    Sheffield. Hon. James Bradford                            10.00
    Shelburne Falls. Rev. W. D. M. F.                          0.51
    Somerville. Matthew P. Elliott, Box of Hats,
      val. $50, _for Tougaloo U._, and $2 _for
      Freight_                                                 2.00
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          5.00
    South Attleborough. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $6.71; Mrs. H. L. Draper, Bbl. of C., and
      $1, _for Freight_                                        7.71
    South Boston. Phillips Cong. Ch. M. C. Coll               29.46
    South Braintree. A. P. W.                                  1.00
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $12.25;
      “A Friend,” 60c                                         12.85
    South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    30.00
    Springfield. North Cong. Ch., $40.27; Mrs. A.
      C. Hunt, $1.25; H. F., Jr., 50c.                        42.02
    Spencer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $90.05;
      Primary Dept. Cong. Sab. Sch., $8.35                    98.40
    Sterling. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $23; Cong. Ch.
      Sab. Sch., $2                                           25.00
    Stockbridge. Cong. Ch.                                    69.91
    Sunderland. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l), to
      const. MRS. ELLEN J. SANDERSON and MISS MARY
      A. WARNER, L. M.’s                                       5.00
    Thorndike. Mrs. E. G. Learned                              2.00
    Townsend. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              14.00
    Upton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           30.00
    Upton. Ladies’ Sewing Circle, 2 Bbl’s of C.
    Wakefield. Cong Ch. and Soc.                              49.46
    Watertown. Corban Soc.                                     5.00
    West Acton. Rev. J. W. B.                                  0.50
    Webster. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Wellesley. L. B. H.                                        0.50
    Wellfleet. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       39.00
    West Barnstable. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        5.00
    West Boylston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         51.00
    West Boylston. “Willing Workers,” Bbl. of C.,
      _for Atlanta U._, and $2 _for freight_                   2.00
    Westborough. T. N. G.                                      0.50
    West Cummington. Rev. J. B. B.                             0.50
    Westfield. Mrs. C. W. F.                                   1.00
    West Medford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          11.44
    Westminster. “Christmas”                                   5.00
    West Springfield. Park St. Cong. Ch., $55.26;
      First Cong. Ch., $30, to const. REV. C. H.
      ABBOTT, L. M.                                           85.26
    Whitinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $1,294.36;
      “Additional,” $21                                    1,315.36
    Woburn. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          20.00
    Worcester. Central Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               50.00
    Worcester. Plymouth Cong. Ch., $18.47; Mrs. N.
      P., 50c.; Mrs. K. G., 50c.                              19.47
    ——.                                                      200.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $5,080.74
    LEGACIES--Enfield. Trustees Estate of J. B.
      Woods, by R. M. Woods                                  100.00
    Great Barrington. Mrs. C. H. Rosseter, by
      Justin Dewey, Ex.                                    2,000.00
    Hatfield. Israel Morten, by Mrs. Lucy L.
      Morton, Execx., to const. MRS. CARRIE M.
      MOORE, MRS. LUCY M. AVERY and MISS HARRIET
      M. LYMAN, L. M’s                                       100.00
    South Deerfield. Edwards Clark, by O. S. Arms,
      Ex.                                                    100.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $7,380.74


  RHODE ISLAND, $280.54.

    Bristol. M. D. W. R. & C. D. W., _for Mag._                1.00
    Central Falls. E. R.                                       0.48
    Little Compton. “Member of Cong. Ch.”                     10.00
    Newport. D. B. F.                                          0.50
    Pawtucket. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $15; A. B., $1;
      M. H. G., 50c.                                          16.50
    Providence. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $126.56; “A father of four,” $100; Josiah
      Chapin, $25; Mrs. J. M. B., 50c.                       252.06


  CONNECTICUT, $4,560.66.

    Andover. C. E. B. Hyde                                    10.00
    Avon. “E. L. R.”                                          10.00
    Black Rock. Cong. Ch., to const. JOHN FANCHER,
      L. M.                                                   49.00
    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                  23.12
    Bethel. Cong. Ch.                                         20.25
    Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                                     14.36
    Bozrahville. Cong. Ch.                                     7.17
    Central Village. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
    Clinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($30 of which from
      Prof. B. G. Northrop), $59.27, to const.
      EDWARD A. WILCOX and CHARLES H. GRINNELL, L.
      M.’s; Prof. G. B. N., 50c. _for Mag._                   60.27
    Cornwall. G. H. C.                                         0.63
    Durham. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of North Ch., by
      Mrs. M. F. Gatzmer, Sec., Bbl. of C., and $3
      _for Freight, for Tougaloo U._                           3.00
    East Hartford. First Ch.                                  38.13
    East Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MRS. LUCY MORSE, L. M.                                  31.00
    Ellington. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                25.00
    Essex. First Cong. Ch.                                    20.51
    Glastonbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    150.00
    Greenfield Hill. Barrel of Apples, and $2 _for
      Freight_, by Rev. C. Bridgman, _for
      Talladega_                                               2.00
    Greenwich. H. P.                                           1.00
    Haddam. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                           14.25
    Hamden. H. H.                                              0.50
    Hanover. Cong. Ch. Mon. Coll.                             10.10
    Hartford. Pearl St. Cong. Ch., $99.77; Mrs.
      Sarah H. Eddy, $10; Mrs. W. T., $1; Mrs. J.
      O., 50c; Miss S. N. K., 50c                            111.77
    Kensington. Mrs. M. Hotchkiss                              6.00
    Madison. Cong. Ch.                                         4.45
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch., $60 to const. MRS.
      JULIA LAMB and JOHN H. KELSEY, L. M’s;
      Center Cong. Ch., $17                                   77.00
    Middletown. First Cong. Ch., $66.69; Mrs. J.
      D. 50c.                                                 67.19
    Milford. First Cong. Ch., $40; Plymouth Ch.,
      $30; Plymouth Ch. Sab. Sch., $40, to const.
      JABEZ W. SMITH, L. M.                                  110.00
    Moose Meadow. Mrs. H. L. E.                                0.51
    Mystic Bridge. H. C. Holmes                               13.02
    Norwich. Broadway Cong. Ch., ad’l to const.
      MISSES MATTIE R. BARSTOW, ROSINA M. BRANCH,
      ELIZABETH CHAPMAN, ADDIE M. COOK, ELIZABETH
      M. GILLETTE, CARRIE GORDON, ALICE GRIFFIN,
      HATTIE E. LEACH, LUCY G. LEAVENS, LILLIE
      LINNELL, EMMA S. LOOMIS, AUGUSTA G. MCCURDY,
      MARY F. NORTON, ELLEN M. PHILLIPS, HARRIET
      RIPLEY and FANNIE E. PARLIN, L. M.’s                   300.00
    Norwich. Buckingham Sab. Sch., $25; Mrs. O.
      Gager, $5                                               30.00
    New Britain. Mrs. Norman Hart, _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       10.00
    New Britain. South Cong. Ch., $72.73; Miss
      Julia A. Kelsey, $2; Mrs. A. A., $1                     75.73
    New Haven. Third Ch., $14.04; Taylor Ch.,
      $1.68: E. A. W., $1; Mrs. H. C. 50c.                    17.22
    New London. First Ch. (quar. coll.)                       54.14
    New Milford. Cong. Ch., ($30 of which to
      const. CHAS. H. NOBLE, L. M.)                           94.09
    North Branford. Cong. Ch.                                 16.67
    North Greenwich. Cong. Ch., to const. EUGENE
      TOMPKINS, L. M.                                         48.06
    Putnam. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Hampton Inst._                             15.00
    Putnam. Mrs. H. G. S.                                      0.50
    Sharon. Mrs. B. S.                                         0.50
    Somers. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                22.45
    South Coventry. Cong. Ch.                                 27.00
    Southport. “A Friend”                                     50.00
    Stafford. Mrs. T. H. Thresher                              5.00
    Stamford. Dea. J. S.                                       0.50
    Stonington. Second Cong. Ch., $55, to const.
      REV. H. B. MEAD, L. M.; Second Cong. Ch., $10           65.00
    Stratford. Cong. Ch.                                      26.31
    Suffield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        12.26
    Terryville. O. D. Hunter and N. T. Baldwin,
      $50 each, _for Talladega C._                           100.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid_             35.63
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      34.76
    Thomaston. “S.”                                            2.00
    Unionville. First Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._           79.44
    Vernon. Cong. Ch.                                         20.50
    Vernon. Ladies’ Char. Soc., Bbl. of C., _for
      Savannah, Ga._
    Washington. Cong. Ch.                                     11.07
    Waterbury. C. E. W.                                        1.00
    West Chester. “A Friend”                                   5.00
    West Stafford. “A Friend”                                  2.00
    West Winsted. Second Cong. Ch., $85.92; Mrs.
      T. W., $1                                               86.92
    Wethersfield. Cong. Ch.                                    6.15
    Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                       115.00
    Winchester. Cong. Ch.                                      7.73
    Woodbury. First Cong. Ch.                                 24.00
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch.                                14.80
                                                          —————————
                                                          $2,301.66
    LEGACIES--Portland. Miss Harriet White, by
      Mrs. T. A. Sellew, Executrix                            50.00
    Union. REV. SAMUEL I. CURTISS, by Geo.
      Curtiss, Ex.                                           209.00
    West Haven. Mrs. Huldah Coe, by Leman W.
      Cutler, Ex.                                          2,000.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $4,560.66


  NEW YORK, $1,515.32.

    Alfred Centre. Mrs. Ida F. Kenyon                          5.00
    Albany. First Cong. Ch.                                   77.30
    Bergen. D. M.                                              1.00
    Brooklyn. Clinton. Ave. Cong. Ch.                        457.02
    Brooklyn. Mrs. Lewis Edwards, package of C.
    Canandaigua. M. H. C.                                      1.00
    Chesterfield. Mrs. M. A. H.                                1.00
    Chestertown. R. A. C., $1; M. T., $1                       2.00
    Clifton Springs. Mrs. Andrew Peirce, $25; Rev.
      S. R. Butler, $5                                        30.00
    Dryden. M. L. K.                                           1.00
    Durham. Mrs. Hannah Ingraham                               3.00
    East Bloomfield. Mrs. P. W. P.                             1.36
    Evans. Miss L. P.                                          1.00
    Ellington. Anson Crosby, $5; Mrs. Eliza Rice,
      $4                                                       9.00
    Elmira. Miss C. Thurston                                   5.00
    Fairport. First Cong. Ch.                                 80.00
    Felt’s Mills. Joel A. Hubbard and Wife                    30.00
    Gouverneur. Mrs. M. Rodger                                 1.50
    Hancock. Cong. Ch.                                         6.00
    Homer. Cong. Ch., $88.25; Mrs. Augusta Arnold,
      $3; F. F. Pratt, $2                                     93.25
    Irvington. Rev. W. C.                                      0.50
    Jamestown. Rev. W. D. Henry                               10.00
    Le Roy. Miss Della A. Phillips, _for Student
      Aid_                                                    20.00
    Le Roy. A. McEwen                                          5.00
    Lima. Mrs. A. E. M.                                        1.00
    New York. —— $200; E. Delano & Son., $10                 210.00
    New York. Ladies of Memorial Presb. Ch., _for
      a Teacher, Talladega C._                               105.00
    New York. Mrs. John Byers, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            50.00
    Nineveh. Mrs. Lucy M. Peck, _for Woman’s Work
      for Woman_                                               5.00
    Nunda. A large box of Bedding and Clothing, by
      Mrs. Mary Crosnett; “Friends,” $4 _for
      Freight_                                                 4.00
    Oswego. Mrs. Chester M. Dodge                              2.00
    Palmyra. Mrs. Mary Ann Woodward, to const.
      MARIANNA LILLIE, L. M.                                  50.00
    Parma. Ezekiel Clark                                       5.00
    Pekin. Miss Abigail Peck                                   5.00
    Penn Yan. T. O. Hamlin (of which $25 _for
      Mendi M._)                                              50.00
    Ransomville. John Powley                                   5.00
    Rushville. Mrs. John Wiswell                              13.25
    Sag Harbor. Chas. N. Brown, to const. MISS
      NETTIE M. GARDINER, L. M.                               30.00
    Saratoga Springs. Nathan Hickok                            2.00
    Upper Aquebogue. Cong. Ch.                                 6.00
    Volney. First Cong. Ch. $11; First Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $7                                                18.00
    Warsaw. Cong. Ch.                                         21.52
    Waterville. Mrs. J. Candee, $4; Mrs. Wm.
      Winchell, $3                                             7.00
    West Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       68.20
    West Chazy. Rev. L. Prindle                                2.00
    Westmoreland. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                        2.42
    Whitesboro. James Symonds                                  5.00
    Whitney’s Point. Mrs. E. Rogers                            2.00
    Yaphank. Mrs. Hannah Overton                               5.00


  NEW JERSEY, $18.00.

    Colt’s Neck. Reformed Ch.                                  5.00
    East Orange. J. T.                                         0.50
    Irvington. Rev. A. Underwood                               5.00
    Morristown. Rev. W. B.                                     1.00
    Newark. R. D. W.                                           0.50
    Trenton. Mrs. E. B. F.                                     1.00
    Raritan. Mrs. M. T. Veghte, _for Church,
      Lassiter’s Mills, N. C._                                 5.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $82.50.

    Clark. S. P. S.                                            2.00
    Candor. Isabel Connelly                                    3.00
    Gibson. Miss B. C.                                         0.50
    Kingston. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                 10.00
    North East. Miss C. A. T.                                  1.00
    Philadelphia. Mrs. J. R. McC.                              1.00
    Pittsburgh. B. Preston                                    50.00
    Providence. Welsh Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       5.00
    Sewickley. LUCY BETTINGER, bal. to const.
      herself L. M.                                            5.00
    West Alexander. John McCoy and Wife                        5.00


  OHIO, $313.85.

    Bellevue. J. S.                                            1.00
    Belpre. Cong. Ch.                                         13.03
    Brighton. A. S.                                            1.00
    Brownhelm. O. H. Perry                                     5.00
    Cardington. D. C. H.                                       1.00
    Chagrin Falls. “Earnest Workers,” _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       20.00
    Chagrin Falls. First Cong. Ch.                            19.71
    Claridon. Cong. Soc.                                      12.00
    Cleveland. First Cong. Ch., $18; Euclid Av.
      Cong. Ch., $12.35                                       30.35
    Geneva. W. C. Pancost, $2; Mrs. M. T., $1; W.
      M. A., $1; Mrs. E. L. P., 51c.                           4.51
    Madison. R. S. Wilcox, $20; R. L. Brewster,
      $5; Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.; Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      Box of Library Books; Mrs. J. D., _for
      freight, 55c., for Selma, Ala._                         25.55
    Mantua. Cong. Ch.                                          6.00
    Marietta. Rev. I. M. P.                                    0.51
    North Eaton. M. O.                                         1.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                64.00
    Painesville. Cong. Miss. Soc., Lake Erie Sem.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         25.50
    Radnor. Edward D. Jones                                    5.00
    Sandusky. Mrs. C. A. W.                                    1.00
    Senecaville. E. T.                                         1.00
    South Ridge. U. H.                                         1.00
    Springfield. Cong. Ch.                                     7.48
    Tallmadge. Cong. Ch.                                      38.46
    Wakeman. B. T. Strong                                      5.00
    Wauseon. Cong. Ch., _for Mendi M._                        24.25
    Wellington. E. W.                                          0.50


  INDIANA, $16.00.

    Evansville. Rev. J. Q. Adams and Wife, $5;
      Missionary Band, Walnut St. Ch., $5; Mrs. L.
      K. Adams and Miss Lutie E. Adams, $2.50 each
      _for Student Aid, Straight U._                          15.00
    Lafayette. I. M. G.                                        1.00


  ILLINOIS, $565.03.

    Aurora. “A Friend,”                                       10.00
    Champaign. Mrs. A. O. H.                                   1.00
    Chicago. Philo Carpenter, $50; LUCAS E.
      MERRILL, $30, to const. himself L. M.                   80.00
    Danvers. Miss G. C.                                        0.25
    Downer’s Grove. J. W. Bushnell                             5.00
    Elgin. Cong. Ch.                                         150.00
    Freeport. L. A. Warner                                    25.00
    Galesburg. First Cong. Ch., $107.76; E. A. C., $1        108.76
    Greenville. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Jerseyville. G. M. Burke (“Thank Offering”)               10.00
    Kewanee. Mrs. J. A. T.                                     1.00
    Millington. Mrs. C. I. O. V., $1; Mrs. D. W. J., $1        2.00
    New Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                     9.00
    Oneida. Cong. Ch.                                         16.00
    Peoria. Rev. A. A. Stevens (“Thank Offering”)             10.00
    Princeton. Mrs. Polly B. Corss                            15.00
    Quincy. First Union Cong. Ch.                             50.00
    Ravenswood. Cong. Ch.                                      7.52
    Rochelle. C. F. Holcomb, $10, W. H. Holcomb, $5           15.00
    Thomasborough. H. M. Seymour                               2.00
    Tonica. ——                                                 5.00
    Waukegan. Young People’s Miss. Ass’n, _for
      Lady Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                          27.50
    Winnebago. N. F. Parsons                                  10.00


  MICHIGAN, $231.73.

    Allegan. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Almont. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Bay City. M. M. Andrews                                    2.00
    Battle Creek. Miss S. A. G., 50c.; Individuals, $3         3.50
    Blissfield. Dea. W. C.                                     0.50
    Calumet. Robert Dobbie                                    40.50
    Detroit. P. M. S.                                          0.50
    Eaton Rapids. Mrs. C. C. P. Taylor                         2.00
    East Tawas. Cong. Ch.                                      8.00
    Edwardsburg. Uriel Enos, $2.50; Individuals,
      by S. C. Olmsted, $2                                     4.50
    Grand Blanc. Cong. Ch.                                     9.88
    Homestead. Cong. Ch.                                       1.00
    Kalamazoo. Mrs. H. C. B                                    1.00
    Menominee. Rev. A. W. B.                                   0.50
    Milford. Mrs. Wm. A. Arms                                  5.00
    Port Huron. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $26.75; L.
      B. Rice, $5                                             31.75
    Saint Johns. A. J. B.                                      0.50
    Three Oaks. Cong. Ch.                                     24.60
    Union City. Andrew Lucas and Family                        6.00
    ——. “A Western Man” ($25 of which _for ed.
      of Indians_)                                            50.00
    ——. “Anonymous,” _for Theo. Dept. Talladega C._           20.00


  IOWA, $395.01.

    Anita. Cong. Ch.                                           3.80
    Burlington. Mrs. E. S. Grimes, $30; Ladies of
      Cong. Ch., $25.50, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans_                                                55.50
    Cedar Rapids. Woman’s Miss. Soc., by Mrs.
      Arthur T. Reed, Pres., _for Lady Missionary,
      New Orleans_                                             4.00
    Council Bluffs. Cong. Ch.                                 42.00
    Danville. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 5.40
    Davenport. “A Friend,” $50; Edwards Cong. Ch.,
      $20; _for Student Aid, Straight U._; J.
      Godsbury, $19, _for Straight U._                        89.00
    Decorah. First Cong. Ch., $27.35; and Sab.
      Sch., $10.00                                            37.35
    Denmark. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                10.50
    Elkador. Mrs. Mary H. Carter                               7.00
    Fairfax. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 2.00
    Gilman. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 6.35
    Green Mountain. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                11.55
    Grinnell. Cong. Ch.                                       41.35
    Lewis. Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
    Marion. Mrs. R. D. Stevens _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            25.00
    Monticello. Mrs. H. F. P. and Mrs. H. D. S.,
      50c. each                                                1.00
    Orchard. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 2.00
    Seneca. Rev. O. Littlefield, “_Thank offering_”            5.00
    Shenandoah. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Stacyville. Cong. Ch.                                     21.21
    Tabor. W. A. McPherron, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            10.00


  WISCONSIN, $298.18.

    Appleton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                            10.00
    Arena. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                   5.00
    Beloit. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                  10.00
    Beloit. First Cong. Ch., (ad’l)                            5.00
    Clinton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                   5.00
    Columbus. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                  10.00
    Eau Claire. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                   3.50
    Elkhorn. Cong. Ch.                                         5.04
    Emerald Grove. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                   5.00
    Evansville. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                   2.20
    Fond du Lac. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                  11.00
    Fort Atkinson. Mrs. C. B. Snell                           20.00
    Fort Atkinson. Ladies of Cong. Ch., $5.13;
      Mrs. E. J. M., $1, _for Lady Missionary,
      Talladega_                                               6.13
    Fox Lake. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                  10.50
    Genesee. Cong. Ch.                                        13.00
    Geneva. G. Montague                                       10.00
    Hammond. Cong. Ch.                                         2.50
    Hartland. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                   5.00
    Hudson. “A Friend,” _for Mendi M._                         7.00
    Koshkomong. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                   2.00
    Lancaster. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                  10.00
    Milton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                   5.00
    Milwaukee. Ladies of Spring St. Cong. Ch.,
      $20; Ladies of Plymouth Cong. Ch., $10.50,
      _for Lady Missionary, Talladega_                        30.50
    Milwaukee. Mrs. James Baker                                5.00
    Mount Sterling. Rev. P. Valentine                          5.00
    New Lisbon. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                   5.00
    Oshkosh. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                  15.00
    Portage. Mrs. John Jones. No. 4                            2.00
    Racine. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Presb. Ch’s,
      _for Lady Missionary, Talladega_                        25.00
    Racine. D.D N.                                             1.00
    Rosendale. T. B. H.                                        1.00
    Sheboygan. D. B. and A. D., 50c. each                      1.00
    Stevens Point. Mrs. E. J. Montague                         5.00
    Two Rivers. Cong. Ch.                                      2.46
    Union Grove. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                  10.00
    Walworth. Mrs. D. R. S. C.                                 1.00
    Watertown. Cong. Ch.                                       3.81
    Waukesha. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                  12.00
    Whitewater. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega_                                   6.50
    ——. Interest, _for Lady Missionary, Talladega_             4.04


  KANSAS, $4.00.

    Waushara. Cong. Ch.                                        1.00
    Valley Falls. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                          3.00


  MISSOURI, $103.83.

    Laclede. Rev. E. D. S.                                     1.00
    North Springfield. First Cong. Ch. to const.
      CHAS. E. HARWOOD and CATHARINE S. HARWOOD,
      L. M.’s                                                 69.50
    St. Louis. ——                                             33.33


  MINNESOTA, $239.46.

    Hastings. D. B. Truax                                      5.00
    Lake City. Mrs. C. C. Van Vliet, deceased, by
      Miss Kate S. Ruml                                       60.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 11.72
    Minneapolis, E. D. First Cong. Ch.                        13.94
    Northfield. First Cong. Ch.                               59.20
    Plainview. Cong. Ch., $32, and Sab. Sch., $5              37.00
    Rochester. Cong. Ch.                                      50.00
    Spring Valley. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             2.60


  NEBRASKA, $21.50.

    Beaver Crossing. Mrs. E. Taylor                            2.50
    Lincoln. First Cong. Ch.                                  14.00
    Silver. Melinda Bowen                                      5.00


  DAKOTA, $10.00.

    Oakdale. Rev. L. Bridgman                                  5.00
    Richland. Mrs. Minnie B. Rich                              5.00


  WYOMING, $10.00.

    Fort Russell. Rev. Jeremiah Porter, “Thank
      Offering”                                               10.00


  OREGON, $13.05.

    Salem. First Cong. Ch.                                    13.05


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $5.00.

    Washington. Mrs. Fisher, _for Le Moyne Sch._               5.00


  TENNESSEE, $323.40.

    Chattanooga. J. W. W.                                      0.50
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          223.90
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                               99.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $94.65.

    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition                          94.65


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $359.75.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         359.75


  GEORGIA, $233.70.

    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition                           75.25
    Marietta. Cong. Sab. Sch., A Christmas Offering            4.00
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $144.45; Rent,
      $10                                                    154.45


  ALABAMA, $631.48.

    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition, $274.93; Cong.
      Ch., $1.10; E. C. B., 50c                              276.53
    Montgomery. Public Sch. Fund                             175.00
    Selma. Rent, Burrill Sch.                                100.00
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                          79.95


  MISSISSIPPI, $98.75.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition                            91.75
    Tougaloo. Cong. Ch.                                        7.00


  LOUISIANA, $110.45.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        110.45


  TEXAS, $2.40.

    Goliad. Rev. M. T.                                         1.00
    Paris. Sab. Sch., by Rev. J. W. Roberts                    1.40


  INCOME, $290.00.

    Avery Fund                                               190.00
    General Fund                                              50.00
    C. F. Dike Fund                                           50.00


  DOMINION OF CANADA, $3.00.

    Montreal. Rev. Henry Wilkes, D. D.                         3.00


  ——, $32.00.

    —— “Sisters”                                              30.00
    —— A Friend                                                2.00
                                                          —————————
      Total for December                                 $20,181.87
      Total from Oct. 1st. to Dec. 31st.                  49,440.44


  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INST., AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Groton, Mass. Elizabeth Farnsworth                       $10.00
    Worcester, Mass. Central Ch., (ad’l)                       0.50
    Orange, Conn. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             25.00
    Brooklyn, N. Y. Clinton Av. Cong. Ch.                    250.00
                                                          —————————
          Total                                              285.50
    Previously acknowledged in November Receipts           2,901.00
                                                          —————————
          Total                                           $3,186.50


  FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

    Leeds, England. Robert Arthington, conditional
      Pledge, £3,000.
    Received from Oct. 1st to Nov. 31st                   $1,607.90
                                                          =========

                                  H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
                                                56 Reade St., N. Y.




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided that children and others who have
not professed their faith may be constituted life members without
the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less
than twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be
advisory, and the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and
agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the
transaction of all such business as usually appertains to the
executive committees of missionary and other benevolent societies;
the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
missionaries; and its doings to be subject always to the revision
of the annual meeting, which shall, by a reference mutually
chosen, always entertain the complaints of any aggrieved agent or
missionary; and the decision of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields
of labor, and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor
particularly to discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the
known fruits of unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment
those who hold their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_--In Va., 1; N. C., 6; S. C., 2; Ga., 13;
Ky., 6; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14; La., 17; Miss., 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_,
2. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 76.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.--_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Savannah, Macon,
Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis,
Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 31. Total 51.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.--Among the Freedmen, 284;
among the Chinese, 22; among the Indians, 11; in Africa, 13. Total,
330. STUDENTS--In Theology, 102; Law, 23; in College Course, 75;
in other studies, 7,852. Total, 8,052. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches--the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa--a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

  NEW YORK.   H. W. Hubbard, Esq., Treasurer,
              56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON.     Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Dis’t Sec.,
              Room 21 Congregational House.
  CHICAGO.    Rev. Jas. Powell, Dis’t Sec.,
              112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars
in trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required--in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                       Brown Brothers & Co.

                          59 WALL STREET,

                             NEW YORK.

=Buy and Sell Bills of Exchange= on Great Britain and Ireland,
France, Germany, Belgium and Holland, =Issue Commercial and
Travelers’ Credits, in Sterling=, available in any part of the
world, and in =Francs= for use in Martinique and Guadaloupe.

Make Telegraphic Transfers of Money

Between this and other countries, through London and Paris.

=Make Collection of Drafts drawn abroad= on all parts of the United
States and Canada, and of =Drafts drawn in the United States= on
Foreign Countries.

=Travelers’ Credits= issued either against cash deposited or
satisfactory guarantee of repayment: In Dollars for use in the
United States and adjacent countries; or in Pounds Sterling for use
in any part of the world. Applications for credits may be addressed
as above direct, or through any first-class Bank or Banker.

                       BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                     26 Chapel St., Liverpool.

                       BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                Founder’s Court, Lothbury, London.


                 *       *       *       *       *


               NEW AND IMPROVED STYLES THIS SEASON.

                               MASON
                                AND
                              HAMLIN
                              ORGANS

BEST IN THE WORLD: winners of highest distinction at EVERY GREAT
WORLD’S FAIR FOR THIRTEEN YEARS. Prices, $51, $57, $66, $84, $108,
to $508 and upwards. For easy payments, $6.30 a quarter and upward.
Catalogues free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO., 154 Tremont Street,
Boston; 46 East 14th Street, NEW YORK; 149 Wabash Ave., CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           J. & R. LAMB,
                       59 Carmine St., N. Y.
                         CHURCH FURNISHERS


                          [Illustration]

               Memorial Windows, Memorial Tablets,
                Sterling Silver Communion Services.

                        SEND FOR CIRCULAR.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

                      Oxford Teachers’ Bibles

                       THOS. NELSON & SONS,

                 No. 42 Bleecker Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink,

                   FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                       COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.

          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.

                      _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”

                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         W. & B. DOUGLAS,

                        Middletown, Conn.,

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                              PUMPS,

HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON
CURBS, YARD HYDRANTS, STREET WASHERS, ETC.

[Illustration]

Highest Medal awarded them by the Universal Exposition at Paris,
France, in 1867; Vienna, Austria, in 1873; and Philadelphia, 1876.

                         Founded in 1832.

                        Branch Warehouses:

                         85 & 87 John St.
                             NEW YORK,

                                AND

                         197 Lake Street,
                             Chicago.

                _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


       *       *       *       *       *




THE THIRTY-FIFTH VOLUME

OF THE

American Missionary.

1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


Shall we not have a largely increased Subscription List for 1881?

We regard the _Missionary_ as the best means of communication with
our friends, and to them the best source of information regarding
our work.

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs,
will easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our
Magazine, and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under editorial supervision at this office, aided by the steady
contributions of our intelligent missionaries and teachers in
all parts of the field, and with occasional communications from
careful observers and thinkers elsewhere, the _American Missionary_
furnishes a vivid and reliable picture of the work going forward
among the Indians, the Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and the
Freedmen as citizens in the South and as missionaries in Africa.

It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting
the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of
current events relating to their welfare and progress.

Patriots and Christians interested in the education and
Christianizing of these despised races are asked to read it, and
assist in its circulation. Begin with the January number and the
new year. The price is only Fifty Cents per annum.

The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the
persons indicated on page 64.

Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                               H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                         56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO ADVERTISERS.

Special attention is invited to the advertising department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY. Among its regular readers are thousands of
Ministers of the Gospel, Presidents, Professors and Teachers in
Colleges, Theological Seminaries and Schools; it is, therefore,
a specially valuable medium for advertising Books, Periodicals,
Newspapers, Maps, Charts, Institutions of Learning, Church
Furniture, Bells, Household Goods, &c.

Advertisers are requested to note the moderate price charged for
space in its columns, considering the extent and character of its
circulation.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

           THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT,
                                         56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.

       *       *       *       *       *


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, PRINTER, 101 CHAMBERS STREET, NEW YORK.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious punctuation misprints have been corrected.

Ditto marks were replaced with the text they represent in order to
facilitate eBook alignment.

Invalid date of Nov. 31st on page 62 left as printed.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 35, NO. 2, FEBRUARY, 1881 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.