VOL. XXXV.                                         NO. 11.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                          NOVEMBER, 1881.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETING—FINANCIAL                               321
    PARAGRAPHS—JOHN BROWN MEMORIAL STEAMER                 322
    CUT OF FIRST GRADE CERTIFICATE                         323
    PARAGRAPHS                                             324
    PRESIDENT GARFIELD AND THE NEGRO                       325
    BENEFACTIONS                                           327
    GENERAL NOTES—Africa, Indians, Chinese                 327


  THE FREEDMEN.

    SUMMER REVIVALS.

      McLeansville, N.C.; Savannah, Ga.; McIntosh, Ga.;
        Talladega, Anniston, Lawsonville, The Cove,
        Childersburg, Ala.; Nashville, Tenn.; Paris,
        Texas                                              330

    OPENING OF SCHOOLS.

      Berea, Ky.; McLeansville, N.C.; Montgomery,
        Mobile, Ala.; Howard University, D.C.; Hampton,
        Va.; Savannah, Ga.; Atlanta University, Ga.;
        Macon, Ga.; Selma, Ala.; Tougaloo, Miss.; Fisk
        University, Nashville, Tenn.                       332

    OBITUARY.

      Death of Mrs. T. C. Steward—Death of Rev. G. W.
        Walker                                             340

    EXTRACTS FROM MINUTES OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE           341


  WOMAN’S HOME MISS. ASSOC’N.

    MONTHLY REPORT                                         342


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    THOMAS CHATHAM                                         343


  LETTERS TO THE TREASURER                                 344

  RECEIPTS                                                 346

  CONSTITUTION                                             351

  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                             352

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:
         Published by the American Missionary Association,
                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D.D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D.D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R.I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R.I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D.D., R.I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D.D., N.J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D.D., D.C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D.D., N.H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D.D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D.D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N.Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Washington Ter.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D.D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M.D., N.H.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D.D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D.D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N.Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D.D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Mass.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D.D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D.D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D., D.C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D.D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D.D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N.Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N.J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., N.Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R.I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D.D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D.D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D.D., Kansas.
    Rev. W. H. WILLCOX, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. G. B. WILLCOX, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, Mass.
    Rev. E. B. WEBB, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. C. I. WALKER, Mich.
    Rev. A. H. ROSS, Mich.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N.Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    J. A. HAMILTON,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XXXV.      NOVEMBER, 1881.      NO. 11.

                 *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR ANNUAL MEETING.

The Thirty-fifth Annual Meeting of the American Missionary
Association will be held in Plymouth Church (Rev. G. W. Phillips’),
Worcester, Mass., commencing November 1st, at 3 P.M., at which
time the report of the Executive Committee will be read. The
Annual Sermon will be preached Tuesday evening by Rev. C. D.
Hartranft, D.D. Wednesday and Thursday will be occupied by reading
of papers, reports, discussions, business, etc. The following
persons with others have promised to be present and participate in
the exercises: Presidents Fairchild, Ware, Hamlin, Chamberlain,
Buckham; Gen’ls O. O. Howard, S. C. Armstrong; Col. H. G. Prout,
late of the Khedive’s staff, Egypt; Capt. R. H. Pratt, of Carlisle,
Pa.; U.S. Senator G. F. Hoar, Prof. Cyrus Northrop, Hon. J. J. H.
Gregory, John B. Gough, and Rev. Drs. Herrick, Duryea and Mayo.

The following railroads have agreed to furnish free return tickets
to persons attending the meeting: New York and New England;
Worcester and Nashua to Portland, Me.; Boston, Barre and Gardner
and Cheshire; Providence and Worcester to Whitin’s and stations
south. The N.Y., N.H. and H. R. R. offers tickets to Worcester and
return at the following rates: from New York $5.60, Stamford $4.70,
South Norwalk $4.45, Bridgeport $4, New Haven $3.50, Meriden $2.75,
Middletown $2.75, Hartford $2.

       *       *       *       *       *

The receipts of the Association for the month of Sept. were
$30,417.94. For the financial year, which closed with that month,
the receipts were, with balance, $244,578.96. One year ago the
Association asked for an advance of 25 per cent., and its friends
have made it 30 per cent. The year has been closed without any
debt upon the treasury, and with a balance in hand of $518.85.
In addition to this, the Association has used during the year
$77,131.97 of the Stone Fund toward the erection of the buildings
for which it was given. This makes a grand total for the year of
$321,710.93. This enlargement of the capital by the addition of the
Stone buildings will require a corresponding increase of funds to
carry on the business. The advance of the past year is an occasion
for profound gratitude, and inspires hope for the needed increase
of the coming year.

We are happy to furnish our readers in this number with a few
reports of the successful openings of our schools South. We give
also a few brief accounts of summer revivals. Such times of
refreshing are quite as frequent among the colored people in summer
as in winter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. Hamilton W. Pierson, D.D., formerly missionary of this
Association at Andersonville, Ga., has written a very readable
book on the old time social, political and religious life in the
South-west. In it he has garnered up many valuable remembrances of
the condition of both whites and blacks before the war, special
reference being made to their religious experiences, which he had
the privilege of observing during many years of service as agent of
the American Bible Society. He calls his book “In the Brush.” It is
published by D. Appleton & Company, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


JOHN BROWN MEMORIAL STEAMER FOR THE MENDI MISSION.

The Mendi Mission was organized in 1842, in about 7 deg. north
latitude, West Central Africa. It was primarily a mission for the
Amistad captives, freed slaves who had escaped from bondage by the
incidents following their mysterious appearance in Long Island
Sound, and their subsequent imprisonment in New Haven, Connecticut.
The men who, by their charitable forethought, provided for their
defense in the U.S. Supreme Court by John Quincy Adams, and for
their education while in New England as well as their return to
Africa, were most active in founding the A. M. A., which has
sustained the mission since 1846.

The fact that there are no roads or domestic animals for carrying
burdens in the Mendi country, renders the use of boats a necessity
as a means for transportation. The interests of the mission have
suffered for the want of a steamer to facilitate the work at the
saw-mill and to carry the missionaries back and forth up the river,
thereby avoiding the exposure to disease by long delays in the
marshy regions.

The proper persons are already provided to have the steamer in
charge, and we only wait for the little rills and large streams of
benevolence to flow in and float it. About $10,000 are needed.

In order that old and young may have a part in this work, we have
arranged to issue two grades of shares as follows: First Grade,
$100; Second Grade, $10. The certificates of shares will be
issued on heavy calendered paper, size about 8 by 10 inches, in
two colors; the First Grade Certificates green and black, and the
Second Grade black and brown.

We cordially invite all friends of African missions, whether
pastors, Sunday-school superintendents, heads of families or
others, to assist us in providing, at an early date, this
much-needed agency for the development of Christian civilization in
the dark continent.

All communications should be forwarded to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer
of the American Missionary Association, 56 Reade Street, New York.


[Illustration: FACSIMILE OF FIRST GRADE CERTIFICATE REDUCED
ONE-THIRD.]


The progress of educational work in Mississippi, according to
the published statement of Gen. J. A. Smith, Sup’t of Public
Instruction for the State, is of a hopeful character. The number of
white children in public schools for the year 1880 was greater by
7,037 than in 1879, and the number of colored children 12,914. The
average daily attendance shows an increase of 6,500 white children
and 11,288 colored. The number of teachers employed was 202 over
that of the preceding year, the increase being confined to the
colored teachers. The total number of pupils enrolled for 1880 was
112,994 whites and 123,710 colored. The total disbursements were
$830,704.79.

       *       *       *       *       *

Upon the invitation of the Congregational Union of England and
Wales at the hand of Rev. Dr. Alexander Hannay, of London, and by
the appointment of the National Council and of this Association,
our Secretary, Dr. M. E. Strieby, went over to represent both
of these bodies at the Jubilee of that Union, which was held at
Manchester in Free Trade Hall, October 4th to the 10th. We learned
by cablegram that Rev. Henry Allon, D.D., was made chairman, and
that Dr. Strieby, with other foreign delegates, was heard on the
6th. It was fitting that the English people, who had done so much
through this Association in the way of aiding students in our
Southern institutions, and of raising the fund for the Arthington
Mission in the basin of the Upper Nile, should seek and secure a
report from our Secretary-in-Chief, of the processes and results of
this missionary organization. Great Britain and America both owe
a common debt to our Freedmen and to the land of their ancestors.
Dr. Strieby is expected to return in season to participate in
our Annual Meeting, making report of English public sentiment in
respect to this great international missionary enterprise. During
his absence, his place has been filled by Rev. Jos. E. Roy, D.D.,
the Field Superintendent of our Southern work.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a happy thought of Prof. Henry Cowles, after he had
completed his set of sixteen volumes of Commentaries on the Bible,
that he would assign the property of the stereotype plates, the
copyrights, and the contract with the publishers, D. Appleton &
Co., to the American Board, the Home Missionary Society and this
Association. His generous devising took in also the missionaries
themselves, and provides that the fifteen per cent. of royalty
on all books sold shall be applied, at the discretion of the
Secretaries of the several societies, in supplying with the
commentaries such of them as may not be well able to buy them. When
our Executive Committee, in September, passed its vote of thanks
for this testimony of love, they did not know that a few days
before, this John-like disciple had been called up to lean upon the
bosom of his Master, who had already given him a better “well-done.”

These notes, giving the latest results of Biblical scholarship,
without the tedious processes of the same and applying a sanctified
common sense in interpreting the Divine Word, will stand for a
long time as a fountain of instruction and of comfort to Bible
students. The question is often asked, What one set of commentaries
on the whole Bible can be recommended to people who do not wish to
go into the extended works of Biblical exegesis? We do not know of
any better one to name than this.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRESIDENT GARFIELD AND THE NEGRO.

The mind of President Garfield was too broad and generous, his
nature too honest and sincere, for him not to take at once and
forever the part of the wronged, however humble, as against the
wrong-doer, however powerful. He knew too well the value of
education to one who was compelled to struggle up from the depths
of poverty for place and power not to emphasize the duty of putting
the opportunity and facilities for education within reach of all
the ignorant.

He first knew of the _Congressional Record_ when he saw it in the
hands of an opponent in a discussion of the slavery question. He
began his political life in the days when the Supreme Court of
the United States, in the Dred Scott decision, had asserted that
slavery was the genius of our Constitution, and liberty the child
only of local and state regulations. With clearest vision he
saw when the war began that the real issue was the death or the
supremacy of slavery, and threw his whole soul into that conflict.
He was selected by the constituents of Giddings, as the one most
worthy to succeed that veteran opponent of slavery in Congress.

After his nomination to the Presidency, in his first regular
speech, made in response to a serenade in New York City by the
Boys in Blue, he said, speaking of the Freedmen: “We will stand
by them until the sun of liberty, fixed in the firmament of the
Constitution, shall shine with equal ray upon every man, white or
black, throughout the Union. Fellow-citizens, fellow-soldiers, in
this there is all the beneficence of eternal justice, and by this
we will stand forever.” A noble sentiment, which must become a fact
established beyond the possibility of successful assault before the
nation can enter upon the path of peace or safety.

In reply to an address by a delegation of colored men who visited
him in Mentor, just before he left home to assume the duties of his
high office, he said, in effect, that it was not within the power
of the President by appointments and official recognitions to raise
the colored people to the level of social recognition and honor.
The path to this leads through education and thrift. The negro,
like every one else, must be the architect of his own fortunes, and
compel by worth the respect he seeks. But turning from the negro
who would have appointment to the nation which he held responsible
for his condition—to the nation endangered by that condition—he
said in his inaugural address, which his successor, nor Congress,
nor the people should neither forget nor fail to heed: “The census
has already sounded the alarm in the appalling figures which mark
how dangerously high the tide of illiteracy has risen among our
voters and their children. To the South this question is one of
supreme importance. But the responsibility for the existence of
slavery did not rest upon the South alone. The nation itself is
responsible for the extension of the suffrage, and is under special
obligation to aid in removing the illiteracy which it has added to
the voting population. For the North and South alike there is but
one remedy. All the constitutional power of the nation and of the
states, and _all the volunteer forces of the people_, should be
summoned to meet this danger by the saving influence of universal
education. It is the high privilege and sacred duty of those now
living to educate their successors and fit them by intelligence and
virtue for the inheritance which awaits them. In this beneficent
work sections and races should be forgotten, and partisanship
should be unknown.”

He also at the same time gave due recognition to the efforts made
by the Freedmen: “The emancipated race have already made remarkable
progress. With unquestioning devotion to the Union, with a patience
and gentleness not born of fear, they have ‘followed the light
as God has given them to see light.’ They are rapidly laying the
material foundations of self-support, widening the circle of
intelligence, and beginning to enjoy the blessings that gather
around the homes of the industrious poor. They deserve the generous
encouragement of all good men. So far as my authority can lawfully
extend, they shall enjoy the full and equal protection of the
Constitution and laws.”

He said to the Fisk University Jubilee Singers, who at his
invitation visited him at Mentor, on the 30th of September, 1880:
“Now, friends, the earthly saviour of your people must be universal
education, and I believe your voices are preparing the way for
the coming of that blessing. You have sung a great University
into being. I hope your voices are heralding the great liberation
which education will bring to your lately enslaved brethren. You
are fighting for light and for the freedom it brings, and in that
contest I would rather be defeated with you than to be victorious
against you. In the language of the song you have just sung, I say
to you, ‘March on, and you shall win the victory—you shall gain the
day.’”

His indignation because of the injustice done this people flashed
out just before his assassination, when learning that this band of
singers had been refused admission to the hotels in Springfield,
Ill., he caused a telegram to be sent to them saying, that if they
received similar treatment when they came to Washington, he would
be glad to receive them as his own guests at the White House.

It would be unjust to the memory of this great and good man to
leave at least this much unsaid of his interest in the race whose
wrongs appealed so strongly to his sympathies, and whose fate he
saw to be so intimately and indissolubly linked with that of the
nation; and whatever in his life and character may be celebrated
and memorialized, justice will not have been done him until
suitable commemoration is made of this interest.


BENEFACTIONS.

—Hon. H. B. Curtis has given Kenyon College $15,000.

—Judge Hoadley has purchased for the Cincinnati Art Museum,
treasures worth $30,000.

—Mr. Ahok, a Chinese gentleman, has given $10,000 toward the new
College at Foochow, China.

—The endowment of Washington and Lee University, mostly from
Northern men, has reached $431,500.

—A gift of $10,000 has recently been made to the Boston University,
to be devoted to the scholarship fund of that institution.

—One donor has given $100,000, and another $250,000, towards the
erection of the new law school building and the physical laboratory
of Harvard College.

—Rev. Dr. Alva Woods of Providence, R.I., gives the Vermont Academy
at Saxton’s River another $1,000 to be used in supporting embryo
ministers.

—The venerable John Baldwin, founder of Baldwin University, Berea,
O., has given $3,000 to establish a school at Bangalore, India, in
the Rev. William Taylor’s work.

—Mrs. Noah Woods of Bangor bequeathed $5,000 to Bowdoin College for
a scholarship, to be called the Blake scholarship, in memory of her
son, who was a graduate of that institution.

—_Talladega College, Talladega, Ala., is erecting Stone Hall by the
gift of Mrs. Stone—the fourth College building. Endowments now are
the great necessity. $25,000 will provide for a Professorship, and
there are four such needing endowments; one of these a Theological
Professorship._

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—The French Chamber has voted a sum of fifty million francs to be
expended in the purchase of land, and in colonizing Algeria.

—Two Societies of Geography have been founded in the Portuguese
African colonies, the one at Mozambique, the other at Loanda.

—A French Society for the protection of the natives in the
colonies, similar to the English Society of Exeter Hall, is to be
formed at Paris.

—England contemplates sending two new Consuls to Souakim and to
Khartoum to watch over the execution of the contracts relative to
the treaty.

—A new expedition undertaken under the auspices of M. C. A.
Verminck of Marseilles, and directed by M. Zweifel, will soon set
out from Freetown for Timbo, Falaba and the sources of the Niger.

—Major Mechow, who has explored Loanda, has arrived at Lisbon,
bringing two young negroes belonging to the same tribe, but who are
completely different as to the form of the head and the color of
the skin.

—In his exploration in the country of the Soumalis, M. G. Revoil
has found the vestiges of a Greek colony to which a Gallas white
tribe had attached itself. The arms, the clothing, the idiom and
the physiognomy of the people of the tribe confirm this opinion.

—Besides the two stations founded at Vivi and Isangila, Stanley
has charged Lieut. Harron with the establishment of a third at
Manyanga, where M. McCall has already installed the missionaries.

—A new International Belgian expedition is to be organized by
Major Hanssens and Lieutenant Vandevelde. M. Popelin, who with M.
Roger had left Karéma to found a station upon the west side of
Tanganyika, has unfortunately succumbed to the fever and disease of
the liver.

—The South African diamond fields have been wonderfully productive.
In a single year, according to the testimony of Sir Bartle Frere,
brilliants valued at over seventeen and a half million dollars
passed through the Cape Town post-office.

—A missionary asked an old African woman what the earthquake was.
“Me tink,” said she, “God Almighty pass by, and de world make him a
courtesy.” This was a strange answer; but it was her way of saying,
“The Lord reigneth; ... let the earth be moved.”

—They have found in the papers of the late Captain Phipson
Wybrants, who died in the exploration of the country of Oumzila, a
very minute statement concerning the Sabia, one of the great rivers
of Southern Africa, which flows into the Channel of Mozambique. The
upper part of its course has been little known. The outline of M.
Wybrants will allow of the correction of the errors on the ancient
maps.

—The complete success of the expedition sent out by the Royal
Geographical Society of Rome in charge of Signori Matteucci and
Massari is likely to cause a disturbance among map makers. These
parties have found their way from Egypt across the continent to
the Gulf of Guinea, exploring many hitherto unknown regions in the
dark continent. A full account of their journey and the country and
people along their way will be looked for with intense interest.

—The conquest of Algeria by the French, in 1830, restored to
Christianity that portion of African soil, but for prudential
reasons, no missionary enterprises were permitted. But in 1868 a
famine occurred which destroyed in some districts of Algeria a
fifth of the population, leaving thousands of native children in
utter destitution. Nine thousand of these were gathered by the
Archbishop of Algiers, and cared for during their youth. In this
way the Catholic church has extended its influence and fame far and
wide through the back country. A hospital has been provided by the
charity of the natives in the village of St. Cyprien where the sick
are gratuitously attended.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIANS.

—Captain Pratt of the Indian Training School at Carlisle Barracks,
has persuaded the apprentice boys who are earning money to deposit
it in the bank, and forty-seven of them have opened an account. An
excellent suggestion for pale faces as well.

—More than nine-tenths of the Indians in the United States
are peaceably cultivating their farms, and sending their sons
and daughters to the Government schools, East and West. The
disturbance, therefore, made by one tribe of the most wild and
untamed Indians in the country will not particularly discourage
or alarm those who have been watching the admirable Peace Policy
of the Government. A little more patience and perseverance in the
right direction would soon overcome what remains of hostility among
these wards of the Nation.

—The liberality of the Indians at White Earth Reservation is
testified to by Bishop Whipple, who recently visited the Episcopal
mission at that point. He says that in taking the offerings, every
man, woman and child came up and deposited the gift in the alms
basin. The Bishop also speaks encouragingly of the religious work
carried on at Red Lake, where there is a flourishing Indian church,
whereas three years ago there was not a single member. Five miles
farther up the Lake, more than half the Indians are Christians,
and these have been baptized within the past three years. The
Indian chief, who is an exemplary Christian and one of the noblest
specimens of his race, has had much to do in bringing about this
wonderful change.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.

—The Japanese colony in Paris are about to erect a pagoda for their
religious devotions.

—The Governor of Foo Chow has issued a proclamation calling upon
the people not to molest the missionaries or the converts who
follow them, either at their chapels or school-houses.

—Out of one party of twenty-five Chinese students, who are
returning to their homes, it is said that nine have changed their
religious faith since they came to this country.

—It is reported that as fifty of the Chinese students ordered home
by their Government were leaving the San Francisco wharf, September
6th, they joined in singing our National hymn, “My country, ’tis of
thee.”

—The American Board has published a new map of Japan about 2½ by
4½ feet in size, which will be found a valuable aid in missionary
concerts. The price of the map on fine paper is 40 cents, and on
cloth 70 cents.

—It is reported that the high Chinese authorities are in favor
of an International Exhibition at Shanghai in 1882. Twenty-two
thousand applications for space have been received from American
and European manufacturers, and if the Exhibition is determined
upon, there is little doubt of its success, both in a political and
an industrial point of view.




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


SUMMER REVIVALS.


McLEANSVILLE, N.C.

The first Sabbath of September we began a series of meetings,
assisted by Rev. Geo. S. Smith and Rev. Mr. Turner, of Raleigh.
On the Sabbath the house would not hold the congregation. Quite
a number came from ten to twelve miles, a few from twenty to
twenty-five miles.

Many white people attended every night meeting. Indeed, more white
people attended the services than had ever attended any one meeting
here since the church was built. A number of them have expressed
themselves well pleased with the preaching.

Seven persons, two of them pupils in our Normal School, professed
faith in Christ. We think the influence on the community, both
white and colored, has been good.

       *       *       *       *       *


SAVANNAH, GA.

My work in Savannah, as supply, during the summer, was greatly
blessed of the Lord. For nearly two months my efforts were to
become acquainted with the church and people in general, and in
the meantime we were preparing our hearts for the ingathering of
precious souls. On Monday night, July 18th, we began a series of
meetings for the unconverted. They continued about three weeks,
during which time thirty confessed Christ. Most of these, we
believe, were hopefully converted. Three or four of those who
sought Christ in the meetings have been brought out into the light
of a dear Saviour since the meetings closed; thus making the
number more than thirty. Seventeen united with us, and a few more
will come in at the next communion. Some, of course, joined other
churches with their parents or friends. We held a young convert’s
meeting each week from the close of the protracted meeting to the
last of September, when I left for school. There was nothing to
me more cheering than to listen to the simple child-like prayers
and talks of the young converts in their meetings. The youngest
are three little girls who are respectively about nine, eleven and
twelve years old. They are always at their post, and it is hoped
that their Christian lives will be long and active.

       *       *       *       *       *


McINTOSH, CYPRESS SLASH, GA.

In my last letter I informed you of the extra series of meetings we
were having. We continued our protracted efforts for two weeks. Now
we have the grand result. On last Sabbath I baptized twelve hopeful
converts, and four were added on profession; all of these are
adults. Sixteen hopeful young men and women have been added to the
church within the last two weeks. God has greatly blessed us in our
efforts to build up His kingdom, for which we give many thanks, and
are very greatly encouraged. Pray for us that others may be added,
such as shall be saved.

       *       *       *       *       *


TALLADEGA, ALA.

Our series of meetings began on the first Sabbath in September,
and at the first invitation offered to the unconverted, at the 11
o’clock service, five came forward inquiring the way of life, and
strange to say, each of that five was hopefully converted before
the next Sabbath. There were several other inquirers during that
week, but on account of repairs to the chapel, we were obliged to
close our meetings on Tuesday of the next week. Eleven united
with our church—six on profession, and five by letter. Not being
ordained, it was necessary that I should get some other minister
to perform the baptism and administer the Lord’s Supper. Elder
Shuford, in charge of the Methodist church in this place, aided me,
and the work was accomplished.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNISTON, ALA.

The revival work commenced in our county the middle of July. Since
that date several churches of different denominations have been
carrying on revival meetings. All, more or less, have rejoiced over
the ingathering of souls.

Even our own little church has felt the visitation of the Holy
Ghost and witnessed the gathering in of the sheaves into the
Master’s store-house. We began our meetings two weeks ago. The
first week we carried on a woman’s prayer meeting. The subject was,
“That the church might lay aside every weight and sin, which doth
so easily beset, and labor for the conversion of souls.” These
meetings did a great deal of good, for when the meetings proper
began, the church was ready to enter upon the Master’s work, which
it did with great earnestness. The meetings closed with eight
conversions. All united with us save one. Others are anxiously
seeking for the blessed Master. There was an expression of great
joy among my people to know that they had seven more to come around
the Lord’s table and take with us the emblems of our Lord’s broken
body and shed blood.

       *       *       *       *       *


LAWSONVILLE AND THE COVE.

The church at Lawsonville has been blessed with a revival. There
were seven conversions and four accessions to the church. At
the Cove we enjoyed a revival season in which there were seven
conversions and three accessions. The meetings did great good in
reviving professed Christians, and bringing parties out of the
path of the church to a realization of their responsibilities to
God and society. I visited and assisted Bro. Snell at Kingston
during a revival at that place, in which there were several
conversions prior to my leaving, among which were four white men of
respectability in that community. I have just returned home from a
revival at my former station, Anniston, where much good was done in
reviving the church, and turning some seven or eight souls from the
error of their ways.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHILDERSBURG, ALA.

We commenced our summer series of meetings on the fourth Wednesday
night in July. On the Sabbath we had a great gathering. In the
afternoon prayer meeting, every body seemed to be deeply impressed
with the spirit of the Lord, and at night many came forward for
prayers. The house was full all day and at night. About two o’clock
I was awakened by the alarm of fire, and one of my members rapped
at the door and said, “Our church is on fire!” I rose to my feet
and reached the church just as it was falling in.

We came down to the Baptist church and continued our meetings. Many
took a stand for the Lord and joined our church. After my meetings
were over, I helped others. At Shelby Iron Works twelve or fifteen
gave their hearts to the Lord, and at Talladega the meetings were
very interesting and profitable.

       *       *       *       *       *


NASHVILLE, TENN.

On the first Sabbath of the month a revival began and continued for
two weeks. Our meetings were large and spirited, and all of us have
been benefited by them, some of us in a special manner.

The little flock is greatly strengthened and revived, and is in a
better working condition. All little jealousies and acrimonies
have been buried (I trust never to rise again), and a kindly
feeling pervades the entire atmosphere of our church circle. As a
result of the revival, five persons have been added to our church,
and these five are _live_ and not _dead_ Christians.

       *       *       *       *       *


PARIS, TEXAS.

Our protracted meetings began here the fourth Sunday in June and
continued two weeks. We had no conversions, but the church was
revived. During these meetings many persons came forward to be
prayed for. Two weeks later the fire of the Holy Ghost which was
kindled here broke out at Pattonville. We joined our brethren out
there in a week and a half meeting. Before the meetings broke up we
had thirteen to come out on the Lord’s side; six joined our church,
and the rest went into other churches. Bro. Jordan Carter, a worthy
young member of my church, keeps up this work here and at New
Hope. The spiritual condition of these churches in the country is
good. Pattonville church has 30 or more members, and New Hope and
Paradise 43. These churches meet with us in a quarterly conference
regularly.

Our white brethren of the various denominations invited us colored
brethren to organize with them in a minister’s meeting which meets
every Monday at 3 P.M. We are discussing some very vital questions
in these meetings.

       *       *       *       *       *


OPENING OF SCHOOLS.

       *       *       *       *       *


BEREA, KY.

The Fall term of Berea College opens with greater promise than
ever before. There are more students, and they bring more money.
Two-thirds are colored, if the slightest shade of black is reckoned
negro; but, if divided according to predominance of color, fully
half are white.

       *       *       *       *       *


McLEANSVILLE, N.C.

On the 16th of September we closed a two months Normal school, the
first ever attempted here. We enrolled 20 pupils, six of whom had
taught school, and four were preparing to teach next winter. Most
of the others were primary scholars.

Our pupils did good work. Since the school closed, some of our
pupils have attended a Teacher’s Institute in an adjoining county,
lasting a week. One of them proved to be one of the best scholars
present, was commended by the county superintendent of instruction,
who conducted the institute, and by him urged to attend the public
examination of teachers in October.

       *       *       *       *       *


MONTGOMERY, ALA.

Swayne School opened last year with 300 pupils, this year with 400,
showing an encouraging increase of 100.

We are securing student aid from friends at the North for several
students who have gone from here to the higher institutions. Most
of our best students are quite young and can do as well here at
present, except that it is better for them to be in an institution
where they can be under proper control twenty-four hours in the
day. The social and church life of these people is so bad that we
advise all to leave for boarding-schools and colleges as soon as
they can.

       *       *       *       *       *


EMERSON INSTITUTE, MOBILE, ALA.

The institute opened its doors on the 3d inst. The full corps of
seven teachers, including music teacher, were present. In the two
lower grades the attendance of pupils somewhat exceeded that of
last year; in the higher grades it was less. The total was 52. At
the end of four days it has increased to 75. This dilatory entrance
will probably continue until the total will run up to 300, or
thereabouts. Some of our students residing at remote points wrote
that many new ones would come; but the drought has delayed, perhaps
prevented them. The uncommon heat of the summer has cut off the
expected means of some. Poverty is keeping a considerable number
of our former Normal pupils at work for the present. The outlook
presents many hopeful points.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

REV. W. W. PATTON, D.D., WASHINGTON, D.C.

Our new year has opened at Howard University with great promise
of good. A remarkably large attendance at prayers, the first
day, showed an increase of punctuality in the return of the old
students, and an influx of new ones. Thus far 80 new students have
joined the Normal Department and about 30 the Preparatory. The
incoming Freshman Class of College numbers 8. Already 13 new ones
have joined the Theological Department and others are expected.
Many more would have come to it, but the standard of admission is
now much higher than it used to be, and will be gradually raised
as better and better material will be furnished. We discourage
and often reject poorly qualified applicants. The Medical and Law
courses are just commencing their term, and with bright prospects.
The medical faculty is one of eminence, three of its members
having been connected with the illness of President Garfield; Dr.
Purvis being the first to prescribe for him after the shooting;
Dr. Reyburn having been one of the six physicians in regular
attendance; and Dr. Lamb having performed the operation at the
autopsy. Last year this department had 81 students (a majority
being white), and this year the number will sum up to nearly quite
a hundred. It is open to ladies as well as gentlemen. All the law
graduates of last year (5 in number) have come back to take the
post-graduate course. The law students this year will number twenty
or more.

The University students, through poverty, are compelled to
spend the vacation in earning money (for which they find many
opportunities to the north of us), and have been acting as waiters
at the springs and the seaside resorts, where their good behavior
makes many friends and often secures benefactors. Eight of the
theological students gave themselves to missionary work with
great success during the summer. One received twenty converts
to the church, the Sabbath before he came back to resume study.
The others were in the rural district of Southern Virginia,
dark with ignorance, where they established day-schools as well
as Sunday-schools, aided in a very interesting Sunday-school
convention of that region, visited the families and preached
the Gospel. It is thought that several new churches will soon
result from these efforts, and one such was organized last month.
They gave special attention to encouraging young men to prepare
for usefulness as teachers and ministers, but hardly any proper
facilities exist there, and poverty prevents them from going
elsewhere to obtain education. We are continually tried by not
having the means to aid those seeking the higher education, as the
number increases and their literary character improves, while the
colored people must have educated leaders in church and state.

       *       *       *       *       *


HAMPTON, VA.

MISS HELEN W. LUDLOW.

Hampton begins the year with a large influx of students. They
have come in much faster and more promptly than ever before. Last
year, our largest number was 385, including 70 Indians; now, on
the sixth day of school, we have 385, only 40 of whom are Indians.
They appear to be a good set—hopeful material—on the whole, in
advance of former years. Indeed, so many more have applied than it
is possible to accommodate, that it has been our duty, of course,
to select the best, and examinations have been more severe. Our
quarters are full to overflowing, especially the girls’. There is
a larger proportion of these than ever. Seven of our returning
students report that they have taught schools this vacation. A few
more who will return are still out teaching. Of the few students,
sixty-one reported having come through the agency of our graduate
teachers, and fourteen more through that of undergraduates. One
girl brought nine. Several of our graduate teachers came in person
to bring their students.

Forty-seven students reported as having worked as Sunday-school
teachers this summer. Some have been active in temperance work, and
give interesting account of their efforts, especially among the
young. They find the old people hard to touch. They are, of course,
most of them too young themselves to do as effective work as our
graduate teachers. A revival has been in progress through the
summer in some of the colored churches of Hampton, and our students
who stayed at the school to work through vacation, took part in the
meetings to some extent. Our own Sunday-school organization was
kept up under our resident graduates. In the course of the summer
our students here also interested themselves in an effort to aid
the Tuskegee Normal School, Alabama, taught by our two graduates,
Mr. Booker Washington and Miss Olivia Davidson; and succeeded by
their own exertions in raising by a festival and otherwise, $75
towards the payment of a small farm (already half paid for), by the
purchase of which Mr. Washington is trying to put his school on a
manual labor basis.

The Hampton School Mission Association, organized last year, will
continue its work by helping in the Sunday-schools in the town,
Bible reading in the jail and poor-house, and among the aged poor,
and aiding them in other ways within their power. Our young men
have taken a great pleasure in giving a day’s work now and then to
patch up some poor old cabin against the severity of the winter, or
to supply some poor old aunty with food and fire.

As to your inquiry for the number, condition and wants of students
seeking a higher education, I suppose if the question were put to
the school, how many would _like_ to pursue a higher education,
they would rise _en masse_, without always much appreciation of the
labor or the value in it; but the Hampton School is so well-known
to be established on the basis of self-help, and for the purpose
of immediate helpfulness, that it draws to it chiefly the class
who are glad of a chance to work their way through school, and are
seeking to fit themselves as promptly as possible for the work of
life. The opportunities for this, in learning trades and in Normal
training, are greater this year than ever.

General Armstrong left on September 27th for Dakota, with 30 Indian
students, 23 boys and 7 girls, who having been with us three
years, are now returning to their homes. The morning they started,
the last three of them were received into the church by baptism. We
feel hopeful for all, believing in the sincerity of their purpose,
as shown in their lives, to “walk the good road by the help of
Jesus.” Every boy and young man took with him from $15 to $25
worth of tools of his trade, which he had earned here by his own
labor. The girls had corresponding working implements. Provision
has been made ahead for their regular employment as soon as they
get to their homes, and Gen. Armstrong goes with them there, with
two ladies to take care of the girls, to get them settled, to visit
their agencies, and see their parents. He is expected back by the
15th, and has Government authority to bring back 42 new students,
including both sexes, 25 boys and 17 girls.

Forty Indian students are still in the school, and looking forward
with interest to having some new comrades to initiate into the
mysteries of civilization they have themselves so lately acquired.
They are about half of them Arizonas, some of them Apaches, bright,
docile and earnest. We only wish that those of their tribe now on
the war-path could join them here. After what experience we have
had, we should not be afraid to try them. It has led us to the
conclusion that the Indian is a human being, and susceptible of
development in the right direction, as well as “our brother in
black” or in white.

       *       *       *       *       *


BEACH INSTITUTE.

PROF. H. H. WRIGHT, SAVANNAH, GA.

The fall term of Beach Institute has opened with a marked
improvement over the opening of a year ago. The pupils of the
previous year have returned with an earnestness for _work_, and
their deportment has been marked with a degree of quiet and
manliness which is very gratifying to their teachers. The new
pupils who have entered have fallen in with the current without
creating the least disturbance. The opening weeks of 1880 were
marred by continual quarreling and even fighting upon the
play-ground. This year there has been none. Quite a number of the
advanced pupils were hopefully converted during the summer, and are
showing the fruits of the Spirit in their lives in school. We have
great hopes of a continued outpouring of the Spirit upon the school.

During the recent cyclone the school-house remained comparatively
uninjured, but the “Home” was rendered roofless and floods of water
poured through the building. The colored people in this vicinity
suffered extremely. Hundreds who lived on the low islands or rice
islands, which are scarce ever covered with tidal waters, were
overwhelmed, their houses destroyed and large numbers drowned. Even
yet, a month since the storm, bodies of the dead negroes are being
found in out-of-the-way places. A planter told me today of two
such found a few days ago by his reapers in the middle of his rice
fields.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

REV. C. W. FRANCIS, ATLANTA, GA.

We find on this second day of our school session a fair attendance
and good prospects for a prosperous year. The number registered
thus far is 125, of whom 82 are boarders, the number a little
larger than that of last year at the opening.

The proportion of new pupils is also a little larger, and in most
cases they come under the care and persuasion of older pupils who
have been teaching them during the vacation weeks. This mode of
recruiting has always been effective, and as our accommodations
have been used to their utmost capacity every season, we have never
ventured to employ any other means to secure attendance lest we be
overwhelmed. A most hopeful feature in the case of the incoming
students is the large preponderance of girls who come without any
special solicitation, which indicates a greatly improved sentiment
in regard to their education and position in the community, and
gives it abundant material for the most effective work in behalf of
the elevation of the people.

There has been little opportunity thus far to learn save from
letters as to the character of the missionary work done by the
pupils during their vacation, but we have good reason to know that
it has been more abundant and effective than in any season before.
A larger share of the pupils went out as followers of Christ than
heretofore, and a larger supply of temperance literature was put
into their hands, and the sentiment of the people toward them and
their work is increasingly favorable. It seems probable that the
appeals for assistance on the part of worthy pupils will be greater
than usual on account of the smaller returns their best endeavors
to help themselves have secured.

A severe and protracted drought has affected all this region,
so that the cotton crop was small and required early attention,
and pupils were taken out of school and attendance and pay were
rendered small. We meet under the shadow of sorrow, having lost
five students by death during the vacation, one of them a beloved
member of the senior class. We hope that the tender and thoughtful
feeling which manifestly prevails thus far may lead ere long to
great and blessed results.

       *       *       *       *       *


LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL.

REV. S. E. LATHROP, MACON, GA.

Our school opened on the 3d of October with 64 scholars present.
This number was increased to nearly 90 during the first week, and
there will be constant additions until Christmas. Many of the
poorest pupils are busily picking cotton, to earn something for
school expenses, and will arrive within a month. Ten or twelve
of the older scholars of last year have now gone to Atlanta
University, so that there are not yet as many grown pupils as there
will be after cotton picking is over. Among the new students is a
young Methodist preacher, in charge of a circuit in an adjoining
county. He seems quite in earnest to learn. Another of our
excellent young men was converted while teaching during the summer,
and has done good work in Sunday-school, temperance and revival
meetings. Another taught school in the same county, and both
labored earnestly in the temperance cause. A bill was passed by the
legislature this summer, allowing the people of that county to vote
on the question of prohibiting the sale of liquor within their own
limits. These two young teachers, aided by another former pupil
teaching in an adjoining county, who has considerable talent for
public speaking, worked hard for prohibition. The result is seen in
the news that comes this morning, that prohibition carried the day
by a majority of nineteen votes.

Several new scholars have come into our school, and a larger number
will yet come through the efforts of these young teachers. The
attendance at opening is larger than for several preceding years,
and indications point toward a steady increase. Atlanta University
being within one hundred miles, draws off many of the older
students, but what is our loss is their gain. The dark and ignorant
communities of our common-wealth are being enlightened slowly but
surely, by the earnest young teachers from this and other schools,
and their influence is not small on the side of morality, religion
and progress.

The school opens more favorably than for several years before,
with an increase in the corps of teachers, and general prospects
for extended usefulness. There is a growing number of those who
desire advanced education, whose purpose it is to fit themselves
to enter some of the higher institutions. Their greatest hindrance
is their poverty; but the pay for school teaching is improving
somewhat, although most have to wait six or eight months before
receiving what they earn. There is, however, general progress in
most localities, and we are glad to believe that the Lewis High
School is doing its share, reaching out to uplift this whole region
of country.

       *       *       *       *       *


BURRELL SCHOOL.

MR. E. C. SILSBY, SELMA, ALA.

We had feared that the effect of a prolonged season of drought,
occasioning small crops and high prices, would be to lessen
the attendance considerably. In this, however, an agreeable
disappointment was in store, as the number present upon the opening
day was four larger than the preceding year, and nearly twice that
for 1879. We opened with an attendance of 153, 19 of which number
are members of the advanced grammar and high school departments.
A number of last year’s advanced pupils have indicated their
intention to re-enter shortly. As yet, last year’s scholars who
have been employed in teaching have not returned. From a number
of these we have received word with reference to their work, and
learned of their expectations to be with us again.

One young man wrote of establishing a temperance society,
and laboring in a revival in the local church. He had a good
Sunday-school which he had supplied with “Quarterlies” containing
notes on the lessons, and he seemed to be accomplishing much good.
His location is one where for many years he has taught school. He
writes that he expects to return to Burrell.

Another young man, who says that he will re-enter, was last year in
school here for the first time, and was brought through the agency
of the former. He has written intelligently of his Sunday-school,
and has also sent on funds to me to be expended in papers.

Twin brothers from a town in an adjoining county, and last
year’s pupils, were converted at a special revival season in
the Congregational church here during the winter. To one of the
teachers, one brother wrote that he was “doing the best he could
teaching in the Sunday-school.” The other said that “the people out
there did not know much about managing a Sunday-school properly,
but he was working in it, and lent his “Quarterly” around among
others, showing them how to study their lessons from it.” These
brothers are about 15 years old.

We learn of the expected return of a pupil of ’79 who has
been laboring very acceptably for some time in Louisiana in
Sunday-school, church and temperance work. He brings a recruit for
Burrell also. Another last year’s pupil of ours, from the High
school grade, leaves the scholar’s seat to occupy a position behind
the teacher’s desk, in the building where for years she has been a
studious learner. She is a teacher in the A. M. E. Sunday-school
of this place, and a member of the choir. Two other young ladies,
former classmates of hers in Burrell, are, for the second year,
teaching with us also.

The nature of our school being, as it is, a city school, we have
not tried to crowd our work upon the attention of non-residents.
We have had, however, pupils from the country and adjoining
counties, every year for some time, with rare exceptions. New
pupils from elsewhere, brought through the agency of others, have
been referred to above. A very promising young man entered this
year from a county adjoining this one on the east, who had heard of
the school from former pupils. Three persons from a northern county
are, I am informed, to come in company with a last year’s pupil.
The condition of the cotton crop is such, that some are probably
remaining away to assist in gathering and storing the same. This is
often the case with country scholars.

The second day of the present session, one came to us as a pupil
who has sat in the legislative hall of this State as one of our
county’s representatives. He has been a teacher since then, and
realizing his deficiency, comes to learn along with children.
We think he shows a commendable spirit, and judging from his
persistency, predict his success.

       *       *       *       *       *


TOUGALOO, MISS.

MISS K. K. KOONS.

The year opens full of promise to us. The school is not only much
larger than at the same time last year, but larger than at the same
time in any previous year except the first few, before the zeal
of this people on the subject of education had had time to abate.
Though Strieby Hall is not yet finished, the lower floor, chapel
and recitation rooms lack but the finishing touches and furniture,
the first of which it is rapidly receiving, the last of which we
look for daily.

We held our opening exercises in the chapel, fitted up with
temporary seats. Our overcrowded Girl’s Hall and dining-room of
last year prepared us thoroughly to enjoy the room which the
enlargement to the building affords. Though neither building is
completed, the work is being rapidly pushed forward. A number of
our students, who came expecting to enter school at once, were glad
of the opportunity to help themselves, and are putting in a month
of work upon the buildings before entering, thus somewhat lessening
the number enrolled at the opening.

Reports of the summer’s work given by our student teachers at
our weekly prayer meeting were very encouraging indeed. It has
been an unusually hard summer for many of them. Delay in finding
vacant schools, the failure of people to keep engagements made
with teachers, and hard fare, were very common. But though these
things came to us in our letters from them during the summer, they
were scarcely referred to in their reports. Interest in their work
and the people with whom they labored entirely overshadowed the
hardships. The disposition to take a cheerful view of things, and
cheerfully and earnestly to meet and work against difficulties and
discouragements, is becoming more manifest. Perhaps this is _one_
of the good results to be wrought in them by the sacrifice and
self-denial so bravely made after the burning of our chapel last
spring.

The interest in the Sabbath-school work is greater. Fewer
signers to the pledge are reported than in previous years. The
temperance work is the “pons asinorum” of our young people. And
well may it be, in view of the almost universal habit of drinking
and using snuff and tobacco. In this work they do grow greatly
“disencouraged.” But the number of signers to the pledge is, after
all, no criterion by which to measure the quiet work done in the
line of temperance.

The number enrolled at the opening last year was 46, this year 74.
The number of day scholars taught by our twenty student teachers
was 1,539; Sabbath-school scholars, 795; signers to pledge, 160;
conversions, 32.

       *       *       *       *       *


FISK UNIVERSITY, NASHVILLE, TENN.

BY REV. H. S. BENNETT.

Fisk University has opened this year with unusual prosperity.
There are at this early date in the year 285 pupils in the entire
school. There are in Jubilee Hall 121 boarders, which is within 30
as many as have ever boarded in the hall. Judging from applications
which have been made, there will be by the middle of January next
75 more. Last night, at the faculty meeting, the question was
earnestly discussed, “What shall we do with those who apply, when
the hall is full?” as it is likely to be within a very few weeks.
It is felt by all of the faculty that if the crops had not been
cut short by the drought we should have had a rush of students
altogether unprecedented in the history of the University.

It is felt by those who have known the students for a number of
years that those of this year are a superior class. The quality
of the students improves with every year, showing that others are
at work elsewhere. We have received already this year several
students of advanced grade, who have come prepared to enter the
college classes. At this time we are negotiating with one who
desires to enter the senior college class and graduate next
commencement. We expect him in a few days.

The past years of schooling are beginning to tell upon the higher
training of the colored youth, and those who come to Fisk for the
first time take much higher grades than new students were wont to
do a few years ago. Most of the old students have been engaged in
teaching during the summer vacation. It is estimated that of 85
in the collegiate department, 60 or 65 taught school during the
summer. Wherever these teachers go, they secure a good name for
industry, conscientiousness, ability and energy. We are constantly
getting good words from white people, directors, superintendents
and private citizens in regard to the faithfulness and acceptance
with which our students discharge their duties. Almost all those
who teach are Christians and engage in Christian work, as a
matter of course, when they begin their day schools. As a general
thing, they enter at once into the Sabbath-school if there is
one, and start one if there is not, and generally get the entire
neighborhood enlisted.

There are two interesting features in relation to the students, the
like of which we have never had before. During the past few years
the trustees of the Peabody fund have sustained a Normal school for
white pupils. The effort has been made to secure an appropriation
from the State for this school in the years that are past. At the
last session of the Legislature an appropriation of $10,000 was
made for Normal schools, $2,500 for the colored children of the
State, that being their relative share. The Board of Education for
the State, to whom the disbursement of this fund was left, decided
that the fund for the colored students should be divided among 50
pupils, and that they should have the privilege of choosing between
five schools to which they should go. Each pupil would thus be
entitled to $50, and each school would receive on an average 10
students. Up to the present time Fisk has received 18 out of the
50, and it is well known that many of the Senators who had the
power of appointment had not taken action. We have no doubt that
others will come as the year passes by.

The other feature is this. Several colored men were elected to the
last Legislature, and as members had the right to appoint cadets to
the East Tennessee University, of course they all appointed colored
cadets. Some other republican members also appointed colored
cadets. This threw the trustees of the East Tennessee University
into great perplexity. It is against the law of the State to
educate white and colored pupils in the same institution: it is
also very much against the traditional prejudices not only of the
trustees of the University, but also of the people of the State.
The trustees met, and after a thorough discussion determined to
make arrangements with Fisk University if possible, to take their
colored cadets at $30 apiece. Fisk University was not averse to the
arrangement, and so the question was settled. We have now in the
University seven cadets, students of the East Tennessee University.

It is accepted by all here as an important truth, that the longer
we can keep a student the better it will be for him and the
institution and the work. The students in the collegiate department
give tone to the whole institution. Every department is lifted to
a higher standard by the high standard of the college department.
As the college graduates go out into the world, they have, without
an exception, taken advanced positions as teachers or other
professional men.

Livingstone Hall is now having its roof put on, and all are
watching its progress with the greatest interest, as promising a
time when the facilities of the institution will be almost doubled.
What we shall next need will be an ample endowment. Who will
provide this for us?

       *       *       *       *       *


OBITUARY.


DEATH OF MRS. T. C. STEWARD.

On the 3d of July last Mrs. T. C. Palmer Steward passed away to her
rest, leaving behind a devoted husband and three young children.
She was born in Windham, Portage Co., Ohio, August 10th, 1839.
She commenced teaching school when fourteen years of age and was
graduated from Lake Erie Female Seminary, Painesville, Ohio, July,
1862, having secured her education largely through her own efforts.
In October, 1866, she was commissioned by the A. M. A. as a teacher
among the Freedmen, and for ten years continued to labor in the
South under its direction, being at Chattanooga two years, at
Marion four years and at Fisk University four years. In 1868 she
was married to Hon. T. C. Steward, who was stationed at Marion,
Ala., in charge of the work of the Association. Mr. Steward took an
active part in the work of reconstruction in Alabama, and in the
most trying and dangerous period in the political history of the
State, after the war, represented his district in the legislature.
In those times of imminent peril Mrs. Steward stood unflinchingly
by her husband’s side and manifested the highest qualities of true
Christian heroism. In 1876 Mr. and Mrs. Steward retired from the
service of the A. M. A. and moved to Chattanooga, Tenn., where Mrs.
Steward’s death occurred in their new and pleasant home on the
crest of Missionary Ridge.

Mrs. Steward was a remarkably efficient and successful teacher, and
a most devoted and earnest Christian worker.


DEATH OF REV. G. W. WALKER.

DIED.—At Centreville, Pa., August 23, 1881, Rev. G. W. Walker,
formerly a teacher at Atlanta University, aged 46 years. He was a
graduate of Oberlin College and Theological Seminary. Of Mr. Walker
it may be said, without biographical exaggeration, “A good man has
fallen in Israel.” As a man, he was quiet, modest, unostentatious,
affable and gentlemanly. Sustaining to him the close relation of
class-mate for three years, the writer cannot remember a harsh or
unkind word as ever having fallen from his lips. As a Christian, he
was always calm, serene, happy. His piety seemed like the flow of
some sweet, peaceful river. The same traits of character he carried
into the ministry. As a preacher, he was Scriptural, earnest and
impressive. He was true and faithful to his trust, no flatterer,
but outspoken. As a pastor, he endeared himself to all by his
gentle manner and lively sympathy. He labored very successfully for
a few years in the service of the American Missionary Association.
In lowliness and self-abnegation he toiled faithfully, earnestly,
for souls wherever the Master placed him, and his memory will not
soon be forgotten by his intimate friends, and especially by those
who were hopefully saved through his instrumentality. He bore his
sickness with a sweet, Christian patience, his greatest trial
being that he was deprived of working in the service of Him whom
he loved. Through a long and tedious decline, covering nearly two
years of painful struggle for life, he found the God he served able
to comfort and sustain him and give him at last the victory. He
leaves a fond wife and son, who have met with a loss that cannot be
measured, and who share the sympathies of a multitude of friends.

May the precious Saviour, whom he served, remember the widow and
the fatherless.


EXTRACTS FROM MINUTES OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

SEPTEMBER 13TH, 1881.

Rev. Henry M. Ladd and Dr. E. E. Snow, who were about to proceed up
the Nile for locating the Arthington Mission, were brought before
the Committee and instructed as follows:

The Executive Committee of the American Missionary Association,
which has commissioned you to explore the basin of the Upper Nile
in Africa, with reference to the locating and the working of the
Arthington Mission, would give you these few words of God-speed and
of instruction.

We furnish you a letter from the U.S. Secretary of State, which
in response to a request from this office, assures you that upon
arriving at Cairo, you will find the U.S. Consul General stationed
there, Mr. Simon Wolf, instructed to facilitate the labors of your
expedition and to protect your rights as American citizens in such
ways as are consistent with his duties and with due regard to local
laws. With his assistance and your English endorsement you will
seek from the Khedive of Egypt the essential protection of his
authority.

It is our impression that near the mouth of the Sobat, where the
Nile comes in from its great western bend, within the Arthington
district, and perhaps upon the very spot where Sir Samuel Baker had
his camp, you will locate the headquarters of the mission, whose
stations in time will be extended into the country beyond; but we
leave this matter of location to your discretion. In determining it
you will consider the navigability of the river, the elevation and
healthfulness of the site, and the friendliness and condition of
the people. You will negotiate with the heads of the people, among
whom you locate, for the use of land needed by the mission. You
will investigate the feasibility of our owning and running a small
steamer between Berber and Sobat.

Upon all these matters you will report as frequently as possible
to this office. A journal, kept and furnished us, such as that
reported by Sup’t Ladd, in regard to the visit to the Mendi
Mission, will be greatly helpful.

Returning, Dr. Snow will stop in England to superintend the
construction of a steamer for the Nile service, provided your
reports shall warrant the Committee in ordering such an expenditure,
and Sup’t Ladd will come back to this country to report in person
and to secure colored missionaries to go back with you in the early
autumn of 1882.

If the way shall not appear closed up, the plan for the second
expedition will be that, with your recruits, you take along your
steamer as freight to Berber, where you will put it together and
launch it to carry your party and materials for building and for
subsistence to the chosen site, upon which you will set up the
house of the mission.

While the Superintendent, like the Apostle Paul, will have his
“beloved physician” to travel with him as associate missionary,
in our prayerful solicitude for your health and safety, we wish
to enjoin upon you the utmost diligence in seeking to preserve
yourselves from sickness, and in keeping yourselves in that
enervating climate from overstrain in travel and work.

We bless God that he has given you a heart to assume this great
undertaking in the name of His dear Son. We commend you now to
the Divine care, and shall ever pray that you may be preserved in
health and in life, and prospered in your mission, until you shall
see that heathen people coming to the standard of the Cross which
you shall have set up in equatorial Africa.




WOMAN’S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Room 20, Congregational House, Beacon St., Boston.

  MISS NATHALIE LORD, _Secretary_.
  MISS ABBY W. PEARSON, _Treasurer_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MONTHLY REPORT.

When Livingstone, at the age of twenty-seven, had accomplished his
task of fitting himself for a missionary, had taken his medical
diploma, and was ready to start for Africa, “a single night,” says
his biographer, “was all that he could spend with his family, and
they had so much to speak of that David proposed they should sit up
all night. This, however, his mother would not hear of. ‘I remember
my father and him,’ writes his sister, ‘talking over the prospects
of Christian missions. They agreed that the time would come when
rich and great men would think it an honor to support whole
stations of missionaries, instead of spending their money on hounds
and horses. On November 17th we got up at five o’clock. My mother
made coffee. David read the 121st and 135th Psalms, and prayed. My
father and he walked to Glasgow to catch the Liverpool steamer.’”

How fitting the setting of this prophetic talk of David and
his father—the completed hard labor and sterner sacrifice of
preparation, the hurried visit by night, and the long walk in the
November dawn! No wonder, with their inspiration, that these two
“agreed that the time would come when rich and great men would
think it an honor to support whole stations of missionaries.”

The autumn is here and a new year of work begins. We are all
promising ourselves redoubled efforts and larger success, each in
his sphere, for the coming season. But what can we do new, what can
we do more, what fresh successes can we plan for missions, and for
home missions? This is one of the questions for us all to ask. Can
I start a new auxiliary? I will not neglect the opportunity nor
lose time. Can I myself make a larger contribution to the funds
this year than last? Then I will, and if I have to give something
of less value in exchange for the privilege, so much the better.
Shall I read more regularly the news that comes from missions, and
so help myself and others to become more interested in the work
by the knowledge of what is being done? Yes, I will make a point
of this. Can I pray more sincerely for the progress of the cause,
remembering with affection and sympathy those who labor in the Lord
in the more toilsome parts of the vineyard?

Are not these questions which we may ask and answer in the interest
of our W. H. M. A.? We are anxious to do a much larger work this
year than last. Would that we might multiply it tenfold! So we must
have corresponding purpose and energy in each spoke of the wheel.
Our missionaries already in the field have resumed their labors
after their summer’s rest. Mrs. Babcock has returned to her work
in Washington; Mrs. Steele begins anew in Chattanooga, Tenn.; Miss
Rose M. Kinney is to be supported by our Association in Dorchester
Academy, McIntosh, Ga.; Miss Sarah E. Tichenor, sister of Miss
Lydia M. Tichenor, who has been in Hooper, Utah, has begun her
teaching among the “poor whites” in Greenbrier, Tenn. She writes:
“I think the prospects are that we shall have a pleasant opening,
as they are anxious to have school. I would like a globe and charts
very much, and we shall need text books for some who are not able
to buy.” Miss Alice E. Carter, who has been our missionary in
Nashville, Tenn., this last year, has been detailed from that
work to present the cause of the W. H. M. A. to the churches.
Auxiliaries wishing to have her address them can make application
to the Home Secretary. Under the New West Commission we send out
Miss Snyder again to Albuquerque; Miss Elizabeth Keyes to Bingham;
Miss Emily S. Robinson to Stockton; and Miss Annie E. Shepardson to
Salt Lake City, (the three last named places in Utah).

We are ready to send out more, to double the number of missionaries
at once, and the fields are standing ripe. Does not some one desire
the “honor” of supporting, not “whole stations of missionaries,”
but—a whole mission station? Does not some new auxiliary desire to
undertake the support of a new mission?

The annual meeting of the Association will be held in Boston,
October 26. We expect the cause of the New West and that of the
South to be presented by those personally acquainted with the
matter, and we hope for a large attendance.

Receipts of W. H. M. A. from August 27 to September 26, 1881:

  From Aux.      $ 38.00
   “   Don        258.10
   “   L. M.       20.00
   “   A. M.       11.00
                  ——————
                 $327.10

Boxes sent:

  From Auxiliary in Monson,
       Mass., to the West      $150.00
   “   Ladies in Central Ch.,
       Boston, second-hand
       clothing to Michigan
       sufferers                  8.90

CORRECTION.—In report of W. H. M. A. for September. In Miss
Wilson’s diary read, “2d, sent soup,” not soap; and in the last
part of the same paragraph read “lunch,” not _land_, given.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THOMAS CHATHAM.

BY MRS. THOS. N. CHASE.

About fifteen years ago, a colored boy whom we will call Thomas
Chatham helped to swell the flock that followed their white teacher
to some tumble-down buildings in Atlanta, Ga.

There is a kind of wild delight about the memory of those days,
“just after freedom,” when the “old uncles and aunties” as well as
the boys and girls endured heat and cold, hunger and rags, inspired
by the blissful idea of getting “larnin’” about as they had gotten
freedom, “kind o’ sudden like.” When they found their mistake, of
course thousands dropped out by the way, but Thomas Chatham was not
one of them.

When we went South in 1869, he had gotten quite a start. I first
saw him in the Congregational Sunday-school at Storrs Chapel, and
noticed that whenever the Superintendent asked a question that
nobody else could answer, a queer-looking fellow with a very thick
tongue usually answered it. In two or three years he was admitted
to the preparatory department of Atlanta University. But how the
boys did laugh at him! How shocking! some tender-hearted child
says. So it is. Many a time my heart has ached for poor Chatham.
But you must remember that colored children are no better than
white ones, and I am sure you have seen some poor awkward white
boy laughed at till perhaps your kind eyes filled with tears. Then
I suppose I don’t see the funny side of comical sights so quickly
as some, and Thomas Chatham did look queer. Although he is quite
short, he has very large feet and broad shoulders, with a big
head set nearly flat upon the latter. Then he was very poor, and
did not know how to make the best of the poor clothes he had. His
shoes were run down at the heel, so that when he walked he shuffled
along, lest, I suppose, his shoes should fall off. He learned with
great difficulty and made very droll blunders, but he never lost
his temper or got out of patience. At the beginning of each year
a new set of thoughtless scholars would make fun of his looks and
his blunders, till his calm dignity told louder than words that he
lived in an atmosphere far above that level where the taunts or
esteem of his fellows had much weight.

His home was two or three miles from school, yet he trudged on
year after year, often drenched with rain and chilled into ague,
hoping that some time he would know enough to serve his people as
a teacher in a country school. Several of his teachers advised him
to learn a trade, judging that from all human appearances he could
never teach or control a school. Others who knew more of his Bible
knowledge and sublime faith thought that, perhaps, God could find a
place for him somewhere; and He has.

Every summer vacation now he goes out into some obscure corner to
teach, and reports come back to us that our best students are not
so successful as he in leading their pupils to that beginning of
all wisdom, the fear of the Lord.

Chatham’s success is to me a living sermon from the text, “Not by
might nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord.” And why that
Spirit helps him seems to be because he is willing to do anything,
to go anywhere, to be only a sower, and let another be the reaper;
in short, while he is weak, yet is he strong, because of that most
beautiful of all graces, humility. How slow I have been learning
the hard lesson, that God passes by the learned, the brilliant
and the talented until they are thoroughly humbled, and, to our
surprise, honors some lowly one who is willing to give God the
glory and not beg back any share of it.

“For thus saith the High and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity,
whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place _with him
also that is of a contrite and humble spirit_.”

       *       *       *       *       *




LETTERS TO THE TREASURER.


The pastor of the church at Rehoboth, Mass., writes as follows:
“The enclosed five dollars was handed me after our missionary
concert last evening by a young brother who told me that he had set
apart a small piece of ground on his farm, resolving to cultivate
it for the Arthington Mission in Central Africa. This five dollars
is the first proceeds.”

       *       *       *       *       *


SAMUEL GORDON HALEY.

  Our Treasurer received recently two thousand dollars for a
  scholarship endowment fund for the Fisk University, which was
  from Mrs. A. M. Haley, widow of Samuel Gordon Haley, and was
  acknowledged in the September AMERICAN MISSIONARY. We publish
  the following obituary notice of Mr. Haley as an illustration
  not only of the excellent character of the man, but also as a
  testimonial to the conscientious act of his widow, who is a
  worthy Baptist lady, in bestowing in honor of his memory this
  amount to promote educational work under the auspices of our
  Association, which was dear to him.

Samuel Gordon Haley, son of Dea. Thos. Haley and Eliza Whicher,
was born in Charlestown, Mass., May 7, 1832. He died in Oshtemo,
Mich., January 14, 1881. At the time of his birth his parents were
not Christians, but they so earnestly desired that Samuel, their
first-born, should have eternal life that they prayed that God
would early bring him into His kingdom. Mr. Haley was well known
as a successful educator and genealogist; he was also deeply
interested in historical research. In 1836 his father moved to
East Andover, New Hampshire. There in the picturesque Switzerland
of America, with its skies filled with light, its green plains
and valleys, its bold and its undulating hills, its grand old
pines and their dark mossy retreats, its bald-headed Kearsarge
in the near distance, in full view of a quiet N.E. village, with
its church spires and school-houses, nestling close at the side
of Highland Lake, childhood merged into boyhood, and boyhood
into early manhood. We may well suppose that such scenes would
awaken the imagination of a mind formed by nature to appreciate
and sympathize with the truly grand and sublime in the external
world, and would help to impart to that mind a loftiness of purpose
and purity of thought not otherwise, perhaps, attained. And now,
amid those scenes so loved in childhood and admired in maturity,
near the revered one who bore him, lies his noble form awaiting
the resurrection morn. His paternal home was one of singular good
sense and piety; it was sincere, unworldly, unartificial. Tender
deference was taught toward the aged, and thoughtful regard toward
childhood, the unfortunate, the afflicted. He loved to dwell on the
tender recollections, kindred ties, early affections and hallowed
associations connected with his home; he eagerly sought every
historical incident of his family; and to his father, the aged
sire, who still lives to bless, was he indebted for many incidents
relating to his predecessors. Mr. Haley graduated from Meriden
Academy, Meriden, New Hampshire, in 1856.

He graduated from Dartmouth College, Hanover, N.H., in 1860. Having
chosen teaching as a profession, he at once entered upon that work,
and for ten years his labors were in academies and high schools in
N.H. During the war he spent his summer vacations in Washington,
D.C., and vicinity, in the benevolent work of the U.S. Christian
Commission. And as we turn the pages of his private writings, and
learn of the spirit which actuated him during those dark, bloody
hours of our nation’s history, we find renewed proofs of the true
greatness of his soul. In 1870 he found work in the public schools
in Illinois, where he labored till a short time before his death.

As a teacher, his life was one of untold usefulness. The moral
and religious development of his pupils was of first importance.
He regarded our schools as a place, not so much of learning, as
of preparation for learning; a course of discipline to draw out
and sharpen faculties; a means to bring the student up to manhood
with ability to perform thenceforth the hard work of a man in his
allotted sphere. To that end no part of fundamental study could
be spared. A thorough, exact scholar himself, he was satisfied
with nothing less than thoroughness and exactness in those whom he
taught. Patient, forbearing, forgiving, he held a high place in the
hearts of his pupils, and with all his gentleness of spirit he ever
maintained a purity of discipline.

Mr. Haley first made a public profession of religion and united
with the Congregational church while at Meriden Academy. But so
true and pure had been his life that little change could be seen
in him after this profession. He subsequently became a member at
Hopkinton, N.H., then at Dover, N.H. He united with the church at
Providence, Ill., in 1872, and was a member of that church at the
time of his death.

As a Christian, he was undemonstrative, but he was faithfulness
itself. In all his relations of life did he sow the seeds of love
to his Master. He was unsuspicious, resented no evil, indulged
in no gossip, perpetrated no slander, exaggerated not his
statements, never wore two faces, nor spoke with two tongues. He
was guileless. A sectarian, a partisan, a demagogue, a sycophant,
a hypocrite, he abhorred. He would do nothing with them but in
matters of necessary business. His finer sentiments were not
projected. He restrained them through natural diffidence, but when
reached they were responsive, pure, refreshing, tempered with
Christian meekness and sobriety.

As he approached the realities of that world for which he had
lived, he seemed to enter into them as much as man ever can until
he has passed within its portals. His spirit gave utterance to
expressions which indicated how bright was the source from which
had sprung the power and preciousness of his life.

Those who mourn his loss have consolation, not only in the
remembrance of those sterling virtues which gave him professional
dignity and power, but in that great, tender and noble nature which
made those virtues subservient to the familiar every-day enjoyments
in a Christian life. They will love to keep in memory his play
equally with his work; his genial, frank and sometimes sportive
intercourse not less than his graver counsels which instructed them.

The whole example and image which ever lives in their hearts, of
sanctified intellect, sentiment and affection, constituting his
well adjusted and honorable manhood, will be their best earthly
incentive to imitate his virtues and partake of his reward.

                                           MRS. ANNIE M. HALEY.

  Buda, Ill., August 25, 1881.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR SEPTEMBER, 1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $183.31.

    Augusta. W.F.H.                                           $5.00
    Bangor. Rev. Jos. Smith                                   25.00
    Bethel. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Castine. Rev. A. E. Ives                                   3.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            13.00
    Portland. St. Lawrence St. Ch.                             7.31
    Saco. Miss Alice Seavery                                   5.00
    Union. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  5.00
    Winslow. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
                                                           ————————
                                                              83.31

  LEGACY.

    Yarmouth. Estate of Daniel Sweetser, by
      Rebecca S. Shorey, Executrix                           100.00
                                                            ———————
                                                             183.31


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $328.88.

    Acworth. Cong. Ch. and Soc., (bal. to const.
      MRS. ANN L. JOHNSON, L.M.)                              16.59
    Amherst. Miss L. W. B.                                     0.50
    Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.00
    Bethlehem. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($2 of wh. _for
      Indian M._)                                             11.30
    Brookline. “Friends” _for furnishing room,
      Stone Hall, Straight U._                                25.00
    Brookline. Miss E. E. R.                                   0.50
    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                2.68
    Candia Village. Jona. Martin                               5.00
    Derry. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $14.57;
      E.F.M., $1                                              15.57
    Dover. Mrs. Dr. L.                                         1.00
    Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              25.00
    Goffstown. Cong. Ch. and Soc., (bal. to const.
      MISS HATTIE A. EMERSON, L. M.)                          18.00
    Hancock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               25.00
    Hanover. Dartmouth College Cong. Ch.                      60.00
    Hillsborough Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    1.00
    Keene. Rev. and Mrs. H. Wood                               5.00
    Milford. R. M.                                             1.00
    Pelham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                42.75
    Reed’s Ferry. Miss H. McM.                                 0.50
    Salem. Cong. Ch. (ad’l), $2; Mrs. Dean
      Emerson’s S. S. Class, $3; “Mrs. G. D. K.”
      $2.34                                                    7.34
    Thornton’s Ferry. Mrs. H. N. E.                            0.50
    Wentworth. Eph. Cook                                       5.00
    West Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $10.15; F.
      O. S., 50c                                              10.65
    Wilton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $22; “Pastor and
      Wife,” $12                                              34.00


  VERMONT, $549.04.

    Ascutneyville. Dea. P. Haskell                             5.00
    Benson. “J. K.”                                            2.00
    Bridport. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  7.50
    Burlington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      49.68
    Cambridge. M. and C. Safford, $38.52; E.
      Wheelock, $5; S. M. Safford, $5; Mr. and
      Mrs. Blaisdell, $5; O. W. Reynolds, $5; H.
      Wires, $2; J. G. Morse, $2; B. R. Holmes,
      $2; M. J. M., $1; J. M. S., $1; J. W. T., $1            67.52
    Charlotte. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             52.00
    Chester Depot. J. L. Fisher                               10.00
    Corinth. Cong. Ch.                                        16.50
    Cornwall. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              28.70
    Coventry. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              27.86
    Enosburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              25.00
    Georgia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               12.10
    Lunenburgh. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                            5.60
    Norwich. “S. J. B.”                                        2.00
    Royalton. A. W. Kenney                                    12.00
    Saint Albans. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          43.72
    Saint Johnsbury. Sab Sch. of South Cong. Ch.
      _for Sab. Sch. Work, Talladega, Ala._                   25.00
    Springfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           47.10
    Swanton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.45
    Waterbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             30.00
    Wells River. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           25.00
    Westminster West. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      22.79
    Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $15.52; Sab.
      Sch., $4; “A Friend’s Memento,” $1.50                   21.02
    Vergennes. Mrs. N. J. I.                                   0.50


  MASSACHUSETTS, $10,808.86.

    Abington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        34.33
    Agawam. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 6.08
    Amherst. Agl. College, Class of ’82, _bal. for
      furnishing room, Stone Hall, Talladega C._               5.00
    Amherst. G. C. Munsell                                     2.00
    Andover. Dea. E. Taylor, $10; M. C. Andrews,
      $5, _for Talladega C._                                  15.00
    Bernardston. Cong. Ch.                                     1.00
    Boston. “A Friend,” $42; Mrs. P. L. Livermore,
      $2                                                      44.00
    Boston. Woman’s Home Missionary Association,
      _for Lady Missionary_                                   26.52
    Boston Highlands. John G. Cary, to const. REV.
      CHARLES NICHOLS, L. M.                                  30.00
    Boxford. Mrs. J. K. C. and Mrs. E. L. S., 50c.
      ea.                                                      1.00
    Bridgeton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.29
    Brockton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        23.00
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch. Mon. Con. Col.,
      $13.56; Prospect St. Ch. and Soc., 50c.                 14.06
    Campello. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              60.00
    Chelmsford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            12.00
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         33.38
    Chicopee. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        34.04
    Coleraine. Cong. Ch.                                      12.00
    Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    891.09
    Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  5.00
    Dunstable. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             19.25
    Foxborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            30.68
    Georgetown. “A Friend”                                    10.00
    Gilbertville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          27.00
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch., $90.42; Jeanette
      Thompson, $5                                            95.42
    Hanson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 6.00
    Haverhill. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $200; Center
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $53.50                             253.50
    Hawley. “A Friend”                                         1.00
    Holland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Holyoke. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         30.00
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., ($11 _of which
      Mission Concert Fund_)                                 259.85
    Hyde Park. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             40.75
    Kingston. Mayflower Ch. and Soc.                          10.00
    Lawrence. E. F. E.                                         0.50
    Lenox. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 17.25
    Longmeadow. Gents’ Benev. Ass’n.                          19.00
    Lowell. Pawtucket Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      14.56
    Lunenburg. Cong. Sab. Sch. (ad’l) _for
      furnishing room, Stone Hall, Straight U._                0.25
    Lynn. Miss Susie Clark, _for Macon, Ga._                   2.00
    Malden. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                39.86
    Mansfield. P. M. E.                                        1.00
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, $2,000,
      _for buildings, Wilmington, N.C._; $1,000
      _for Talladega C._; and $1,533.55 _on
      account of excesses in Church Contributions_         4,533.55
    Mattapoisett. A. C.                                        1.00
    Maynard. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               50.00
    Melrose. Cong. Ch, and Soc.                               52.00
    Melrose Highlands. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      5.00
    Middleborough. Central Cong. Ch.                          42.44
    Milton. S. D. Hunt                                        10.00
    Monson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                40.49
    Newburyport. Whitefield Cong. Ch. and Soc.                30.00
    Northampton. “A Friend,” $100; Edwards Church,
      $35.93                                                 135.93
    North Andover. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (to const.
      G. E. HATHORNE, L. M.)                                  60.00
    North Brookfield. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                48.00
    North Chelmsford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      22.50
    North Falmouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        16.00
    Northfield. Miss M. L. H.                                  0.51
    North Somerville. “A Friend”                               1.00
    Orange. A. S. M.                                           1.00
    Palmer. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         14.84
    Plainfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             8.76
    Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          75.02
    Rockport. John Parsons                                     3.00
    Salem. “Friends,” _for Talladega C._                      40.70
    Sandwich. Miss Hepsa H. Nye                                2.00
    Saundersville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Sherborn. “A Friend”                                       3.00
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.00
    Southborough. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc.                        18.91
    South Egremont. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        25.00
    South Plymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  5.00
    South Sudbury. Ladies’ Mission Soc., Bbl. of
      C. val. $44.68, _for Atlanta U._, _and_ $3
      _for freight_                                            3.00
    Springfield. Mrs. A. C. Hunt                               5.00
    Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              13.70
    Sunderland. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. MRS.
      L. ABBA GILBERT, L. M.                                  40.00
    Taunton. Winslow Ch. and Soc.                             43.00
    Topsfield. Charles Herrick                                20.00
    Townsend. “A Friend”                                       2.00
    Uxbridge. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        40.00
    Waltham. Individuals by N. Scammon, _for Mag._             2.00
    Ward Hill. Elijah Bradstreet                              10.00
    Wellesley College. “A Friend”                              5.00
    Wellesley. Mrs. J. L. P.                                   1.00
    West Newton. Mrs. H. A. Barker, 2 Bbls. C.
    Westport. Pacific Union Ch. and Soc., $7;
      Pacific Union Sab. Sch., $3.86                          10.86
    West Somerville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        3.43
    West Springfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.               10.40
    Woburn. Cong. Ch and Soc.                                113.16
    Worcester. Samuel W. Kent, $10; Salem St. Ch.
      $5                                                      15.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        55.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           7,808.86

  LEGACIES.

    Boston. Estate of Thomas D. Quincy, by Julia
      C. Quincy, Thomas D. Quincy, Jr., and Thomas
      P. Ayer, Executors                                   2,000.00
    North Brookfield. Estate of Miss Lydia C.
      Dodge, by Wm. P. Haskell, Executor                   1,000.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          10,808.86


  RHODE ISLAND, $929.28.

    Central Falls. Class of Sab. Sch. Girls                   10.00
    Providence. Central Cong. Ch., $823.68;
      Plymouth Cong. Ch., $20.60                             844.28
    Providence. Central Ch., $50, Union Ch., $25,
      _for Parsonage_; Ladies of Central Ch.,
      Communion Set, val. $25, _for Church,
      Talladega, Ala._                                        75.00


  CONNECTICUT, $5,403.33.

    Avon. Harry Chidsey                                      100.00
    Branford. Cong. Ch.                                       18.16
    Bridgeport. Park St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   15.18
    Bristol. S. E. Root. $25; N. L. Birge, $25;
      Mrs. H. S. Bartholomew, $10; H. S.
      Bartholomew, $10; Master Roger S. Newell,
      $2; Mrs. Dea. C., 50 cents, Mrs. E. S. K.,
      50 cents, _for Talladega C._                            73.00
    Brooklyn. First Trin. Cong. Ch., $32.50; M. W.
      Crosby, _for Mag._, $1.50                               34.00
    Cheshire. Cong. Ch.                                       19.14
    Colchester. “A Friend,” by Rev. S. G. Willard,
      _for Hampton N. and A. Inst._                            5.00
    Collinsville. E. H. Sears, _for Talladega C._             10.00
    Durham. First Cong. Ch.                                   15.00
    East Hampton. Hawley Skinner, $10; Dea. Saml.
      Skinner, $10; A. H. Conklin, $10; E. C.
      Barton, $10; H. H. Abby, $2; Mrs. F. M. K.,
      $1; J. C. K., $1, _for Talladega C._                    44.00
    East Hartford. First Ch.                                  20.00
    Gilead. Mr. and Mrs. Thomas L. Brown, $5, _for
      Hampton N. and A. Inst._, and $5 _for
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                              10.00
    Green’s Farms. Cong. Ch.                                  19.25
    Griswold. First Ch.                                       40.00
    Hartford. Roland Mather, $100; Newton Case,
      $50; John C. Day, $25, _for Talladega C._              175.00
    Lebanon. “A Friend in First Ch.”                          10.00
    Mansfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       9.49
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch., $200, to const. JOEL
      I. BUTLER, MRS. JULIUS AUGER, MRS. CHARLES
      F. LINSLEY, ROBERT T. SPENCER, MISS LUCY A.
      TAYLOR, and W. H. CATLIN, L. M’s.; Center
      Cong. Ch., $19.50                                      219.50
    Milton. Cong. Ch.                                          6.35
    Naugatuck. Dea. S. H.                                      1.00
    New Britain. Mrs. Laura Nichols, _for Fisk U._           100.00
    New Britain. Henry Stanley, $50; Mrs. Louisa
      Nichols, $50; J. Corbin, $25; A. P. Collins,
      $20, _for Talladega C._                                145.00
    New Britain. South Cong. Ch.                             102.89
    New Haven. Dwight Place Ch., $40; Third Cong.
      Ch., $21; “A Friend,” $5                                66.00
    New London. First Ch.                                     43.87
    North Manchester. Second Cong. Ch., to const.
      DR. S. H. BURGESS and LEVI DRAKE, L. M’s                72.00
    North Stonington. D. R. Wheeler                           10.00
    Rockville. Second Cong. Ch.                               85.11
    Roxbury. S. J. Beardsley                                   3.00
    Sharon. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                     42.28
    South Coventry. Sab. Sch. Missionary Concert               5.65
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch., ($2 _of wh. for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._)                               36.27
    Terryville. Dea. R. D. H. Allen, $100 and a
      Buggy; Mrs. Mary E. Allen, $25; O. D.
      Hunter, $50; N. T. Baldwin, $50; M. C.
      Ogden, $50; Wm. Bates, $5; Mrs. G. E. M.,
      $1, _for Talladega C._                                 281.00
    Torrington. L. Wetmore, $100, Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., $23.32; Ladies’ Benev. Soc., $10                 133.32
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch.                                    52.00
    Waterbury. Mrs. G. C. H.                                   0.50
    Watertown. “A Friend,” _for President’s House,
      Talladega C._                                          500.00
    West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            16.94
    West Winsted. Second Cong. Ch.                            50.03
    Wethersfield. First Ch. of Christ                         57.02
    Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                        75.00
    Winsted. David Strong, $25; Mrs. M. A.
      Mitchell, $10; Dea. E. E. Gilman, $10; C. B.
      Hallett, $7; G. B. O., $1, _for Talladega C._           53.00
    —— “A Friend”                                             15.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           2,789.95

  LEGACIES.

    Greenwich. Estate of Mrs. Eliza Clark, by
      Lyman Mead and D. S. Mead, Executors                 2,507.38
    Terryville. Estate of Cornelius R. Williams,
      (_of which $53 for Arthington M._) by
      Moseley H. Williams, Adm.                              106.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           5,403.33


  NEW YORK, $1,232.85.

    Batavia. Mrs. Anna V. S. Fisher                           20.00
    Brooklyn. Rev. A. Merwin                                  25.00
    Brooklyn. Library of the late Hon. E. P.
      Smith, by Mrs. Smith, _for Fisk U. Library_
    Brooklyn. Miss Halliday, bundle of Books and
      Papers
    Camillus. Isaiah Wilcox, to const. MISS
      CORNELIA O. BRAINARD, L. M.                             30.00
    Copenhagen. Lucian Clark                                  15.00
    Dansville. Mrs. F. C. N.                                   0.50
    Derby. Mrs. Jeanette Bullock                               2.00
    East Bloomfield. Mrs. P. W. Peck                           5.00
    Eden. Mrs. Hannah McNett                                   2.00
    Gaines. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $38.31; Sab. Sch.
      $4.89, to const. RICHARD ANDREWS, L. M.                 43.20
    Hancock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Homer. Cong. Ch.                                          69.94
    Irvington. Mrs. R. W. Lambden                              5.00
    New York. “A Friend,” $50, _for furnishing a
      room, Straight U._, and $50, _for furnishing
      a room, Talladega C._                                  100.00
    New York. “H. W. H.,” _for furnishing a room,
      Straight U._                                            50.00
    New York. Robbins Battell, _for President’s
      House, Talladega C._                                    50.00
    New York. Dr. C. R. Agnew, $20; William
      Patton, $10, _for William Luke’s Monument,
      Talladega, Ala._                                        30.00
    New York. Rev. A. C. Frissell, _for Hampton N.
      & A. Inst._                                             10.00
    New York. N.Y. Colored Mission Sab. Sch., 135
      West 30th St.                                            3.21
    Nunda. “A Friend”                                         10.00
    Pekin. Miss Abigail Peck                                  10.00
    Portland. John S. Coon, $10; Mrs. S. L. L.
      Coon, $10                                               20.00
    Seneca Falls. Cong. Ch., “A Friend”                       50.00
    Sherburne. By Dr. H. A. Newton, _for Needmore
      Chapel, Talladega, Ala._                                10.00
    Sherburne. Mrs. John Pratt, $10; Miss Carrie
      Pratt, $5; Mrs. Harriett Fuller, $5; Mrs.
      Chas. Fuller, $5, _for Cooking School,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Syracuse. Geo. W. Bradford, M.D.                           2.00
    Union Valley. Dr. J. Angel                                 5.00
    Utica. Mrs. Sarah H. Mudge                                15.00
    West Salamanca. “Mrs. E. G. H.”                           10.00
    Yaphank. “H. M. O.”                                        5.00
                                                           ————————
                                                             632.85

  LEGACIES.

    Berkshire. Estate of Deodatus Royce, by Chas.
      T. Leonard                                             100.00
    Rochester. Estate of Lucina Chapin                       500.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           1,232.85


  NEW JERSEY, $35.50.

    Chester. First Cong. Ch.                                  20.00
    Jersey City. Mrs. S. B.                                    0.50
    Orange Valley. “Friends,” _for Talladega C._              15.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $67.50.

    Clark. Mrs. Elizabeth Dickson, $15; Miss Eliza
      Dickson, $15                                            30.00
    Philadelphia. Frederic S. Kimball, _for
      furnishing room, Stone Hall, Talladega, Ala._           25.00
    West Alexander. ——                                        10.00
    Sewickley. ——                                              2.50


  OHIO, $217.94.

    Bellevue. Cong. Ch.                                       22.25
    Brownhelm. Oscar H. Perry                                  5.00
    Bristolville. “Friends,” _for Talladega C._                3.50
    Cleveland. Infant Sab. Sch. Class, _for
      furnishing room, Talladega C._                          38.00
    Cleveland. H. E. Brooks, $5; “Friends,” $1,
      _for Talladega C._                                       6.00
    Columbus. Mrs. James L. Bates                              5.00
    Hicksville. “A Friend”                                    10.00
    Hilliard. Miss E. McC.                                     0.25
    Mallet Creek. Mrs. Mary P. Goodrich                        5.00
    Mantua. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
    Medina. First Cong. Ch., $37, to const. W. H.
      SIPHER, L. M.; T. E. R., $1                             38.00
    Medina. Woman’s Missionary Soc., $10; Class of
      Young Ladies in Sab. Sch., $2, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      12.00
    Newark. Plymouth Cong. Ch., $8; Welsh Cong.
      Ch., $7.93                                              15.93
    Ravenna. THEODORE CLARK, bal. to const.
      himself L. M.                                           25.00
    Rochester Centre. Cong. Ch.                                6.00
    Sharon Center. Mrs. R. A.                                  0.51
    Toledo. Mrs. W. K. Smith ($1 of which _for
      Hampton N. and A. Inst._, and $1 _for
      Tougaloo U._)                                            6.00
    Twinsburg. L. W. and R. F. Green                           5.00
    Windham. “Friends.”                                        5.00
    Youngstown. “Railway Man.”                                 2.00
    Zanesville. Mrs. M. T.                                     0.50


  ILLINOIS, $1,294.12.

    Amboy. Bureau Association, by Mrs. H. T. Ford,
      Treasurer, _for Lady Missionary, Savannah,
      Ga._                                                    25.00
    Aurora. N. L. James                                        5.50
    Bartlett. Cong. Ch.                                       23.00
    Brimfield. Cong. Ch.                                       7.20
    Chenoa. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch.                                 291.33
    Collinsville. Mrs. J. S. Peers, $10; Mr. and
      Mrs. J. F. Wadsworth, $10                               20.00
    Elmwood. Children’s Missionary Soc.                        8.00
    Evanston. Cong. Ch.                                       45.00
    Granville. Cong. Ch.                                      22.00
    Gridley. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Jacksonville. Cong. Ch.                                   46.28
    Joy Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                    12.65
    Kewanee. Cong. Ch.                                        31.28
    Lamoille. Cong. Ch.                                       14.00
    Lisbon. Cong. Ch. (adl.)                                  12.54
    Lyndon. “A Friend”                                         5.00
    Ottawa. Cong. Ch.                                         40.35
    Port Byron. Cong. Ch.                                      5.77
    Princeton. “A Friend,” $50; Mrs. Polly B.
      Corss, $10                                              60.00
    Rochelle. W. H. Holcomb                                    2.00
    Roseville. Cong. Ch.                                      40.00
    Sheffield. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Savannah, Ga._                               9.22
    Waukegan. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
    Wethersfield. Mrs. R. D. Shaw                             10.00
    Wilmette. First Cong. Ch.                                 11.00
    Winnebago. Mr. and Mrs. N. F. Parsons                     20.00
                                                            ———————
                                                             794.12

  LEGACY.

    Galesburg. Estate of Mrs. W. C. Willard, by
      Prof. T. R. Willard, Ex.                               500.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           1,294.12


  MICHIGAN, $870.58.

    Ann Arbor. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             23.80
    Battle Creek. Colored Friends in Second Bapt.
      Ch., _for room, Michigan Floor, Stone Hall,
      Talladega C._                                           30.00
    Battle Creek. Cong. and Presb. Ch., _for room,
      Michigan Floor, Stone Hall, Talladega C._               19.25
    Battle Creek. Cong. and Presb. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              11.00
    Benzonia. E. F. Spencer, $10; H. B. B., $1                11.00
    Chelsea. John C. Winans                                   50.00
    Convis. “Friends,” _for room, Michigan Floor,
      Stone Hall, Talladega C._                               35.00
    Detroit. Fort St. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Lady Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._                        50.00
    Detroit. D. McLaulin                                       2.00
    Grand Rapids. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev. J. H.
      H. Sengstacke, Woodville, Ga._                          20.00
    Greeneville. N. Staght, $38; M. Rutan, $35;
      “Friends,” $16, _for room, Michigan Floor,
      Stone Hall, Talladega C._                               89.00
    Homer. Mrs. C. C. Evarts                                   5.00
    Hopkins Station. D. B. Kidder                              5.00
    Jackson. First Cong. Ch., to const. ANDREW
      WATSON, ISABELLA WATSON, L. H. FIELD and
      MRS. L. H. FIELD, L. M’s.                              300.00
    Kalamazoo. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                             26.40
    Marshall. Cong. Ch., _for room, Michigan
      Floor, Stone Hall, Talladega C._                        39.01
    North Adams. Cong. Ch.                                    12.12
    Olivet. Hon. William B. Palmer, _for room,
      Michigan Floor, Stone Hall, Talladega C._               35.00
    Olivet. Saml. F. Drury, _for Scholarship,
      Straight U._                                            10.00
    Port Huron. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for room,
      Michigan Floor, Stone Hall, Talladega C._               35.00
    Potterville and Chester. Cong. Churches (of
      which $5 from Rev. O. E. Murray), _for room,
      Michigan Floor, Stone Hall, Talladega C._               25.00
    Union City. Mr. and Mrs. I. M. Clark, _for
      furnishing room, Stone Hall, Talladega C._              25.00
    Warren. “A Friend”                                         2.00
    White Lake. Robert Garner                                 10.00


  IOWA, $308.61.

    Anita. Cong. Ch.                                           3.00
    Belle Plain. Cong. Ch.                                     3.25
    Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                 29.26
    Creston. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_              5.05
    Dubuque. James Beach, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    De Witt. Cong. Ch.                                        32.51
    Exira. Dea. Lyman Bush                                    10.00
    Farragut. Cong. Ch.                                       17.50
    Grinnell. Cong. Ch.                                      100.80
    Maquoketa. Capt. N. P. Hubbard, $35, _for
      furnishing room, Stone Hall, Talladega C._
      and $15 _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                 50.00
    Ogden. Mrs. A. M. Palmer, _for Talladega C._              10.00
    Red Oak. Cong. Ch.                                        10.70
    Sergeant’s Bluff. A. M. B.                                 1.00
    Sioux City. Cong. Ch.                                     15.54
    Waterloo. Rev. Clayton Welles, _for
      President’s House, Talladega, Ala._                     15.00


  WISCONSIN, $1,300.93.

    Appleton. Jared Lanphere                                  50.00
    Beloit. First. Cong. Ch., $175; “N. D. B.”, $5           180.00
    Beloit. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           30.00
    Beloit. Benj. Brown, $10; “A Friend,” $10;
      “Two Friends,” $7; Second Cong. Ch. $8.05;
      C. B. Salmon, J. Ritsher, O. C. Johnson, J.
      Hackett and S. J. Goodman, $5 ea.; “A
      Friend,” $4; John Ram, $4; J. B. Peet,
      $3.50; T. W. Laramie, $3; Fayette Windslow,
      Mr. Waterman, Rev. J. McLean, “C. C.,” Mrs.
      M. E. Bushnell, Chas. Newburg, H. B.
      Johnson, “A Friend” and Mrs. J. W. Abbott,
      $2 ea.; “A Friend,” $1.40; Mrs. Keep and
      daughter, $1.50; 18 Individuals, $1 ea.;
      also Eleven boxes of Clothing, Bedding, &c.,
      _for furnishing, Talladega C._                         113.45
    Beloit. C. B. Salmon and Eclipse Wind Engine
      Co., Windmill with Force Pump and Pipe, val.
      $180, _for Talladega C._
    Brandon. Cong. Ch.                                         7.50
    Brant. Mrs. E. W. Scott                                    2.00
    Elkhorn. Mrs. Maria C. Hand, to const. MISS
      LYDIA M. HAND, L. M.                                    30.00
    Fort Howard. Cong. Ch.                                    25.00
    Fox Lake. Cong. Ch.                                        6.30
    Fulton. Two Bundles of C., _for Talladega,
      Ala._
    Genesee. Box of C., _for Talladega, Ala._
    Geneva. E. W. Warner                                      10.00
    Geneva Lake. John W. Boyd, Sidney Buell, Mrs.
      Harriet Allen, “Friend,” and Mr. Barnard $5
      ea.; S. J. Nichols & Son, $5; W. H.
      Hammersly, $3; Walter Allen, D. S. Allen and
      John McDonald, $2 ea.; Mrs. C. B. and I. W.
      $1 ea.; also Box of C., _for furnishing,
      Talladega C._                                           41.00
    Janesville. First Cong. Ch.                               53.02
    Milwaukee. _Plymouth Ch._: E. R. Persons,
      Joshua Start, A. V. H. Carpenter and E.
      Townshend Mix. $5 ea.; “A Friend,” $3; “A
      Friend,” $3; Anthony Van Wyck, Thomas Buell
      and J. R. Brigham, $2 ea.; S. D. V., $1.
      _Spring St. Ch._: E. D. Holton, $10; Mrs. H.
      F. Storey, $5; H. E. Story, $3; J. O. Myers,
      E. R. Godfrey, M. P. Houson and D. W.
      Perkins, $2 ea.; 7 Individuals $1 ea.; Mrs.
      Dr. A., 50c. _Calvary Ch._: J. Johnson, $5;
      J. Plankinton, $5; J. B. Bradford, $2; “Two
      Friends,” 75c., _for furnishing, Talladega
      C._                                                     79.25
    River Falls. Cong. Ch.                                    29.66
    Troy Centre. Bbl. of C., _for Talladega, Ala._
    Wauwatosa. Box of C., _for Talladega, Ala._
    Wauwatosa. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             6.50
    Whitewater. Geo. Esterly, allowance on bill of
      furniture, $44; J. S. Partridge, $10; C. M.
      Blachman, N. H. Allen, F. W. Tratt, D. S.
      Cook, J. W. Denison, S. B. Edwards, N. M.
      Littlejohn and Mrs. F. White, $5 each; C. M.
      Clark, $4; Mrs. Thomas Basset, $3; Mrs.
      Nelson Salesbury, $3; Miss F. White, H. D.
      Bell, Dr. Leland, Capt. McIntyre, Mr.
      Dexter, E. D. Coe, R. McBeath and E. B
      Crandall, $2 each; P. and G. Trautman, $2;
      Eight Individuals, $1 each; also three boxes
      Clothing, etc. _Immanuel Ch._: H. M. Finch,
      $10; J. A. Dutcher, $5; J. M Crumbie, $5; J.
      R. Goodrich, J. R. Saville, Willard Merrill,
      S. P. Burt and E. H. Chandler, $2 each; P.
      C. H. and G. W. H. $1 each; R. M. 50c., _for
      furnishing, Talladega C._                              118.50
    Whitewater. Normal School (by purchase for
      $25), 1,960 vols. school text books, _for
      Talladega C._
                                                             ——————
                                                             782.18

  LEGACIES.

    Darien. Estate of Mrs. Lydia L. Sheldon, by
      Charles Allen, Ex.                                      18.75
    Monroe. Estate of Mrs. Orissa Wood, by J. L.
      Rood, Ex.                                              500.00
                                                            ———————
                                                           1,300.93


  MINNESOTA, $44.77.

    Afton. Cong. Ch.                                          12.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 25.88
    Minneapolis. E. D. First Cong. Ch.                         4.39
    Spring Valley. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             2.50


  KANSAS, $28.26.

    Council Grove. First Cong. Ch.                             5.00
    Osawatomie. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Ottawa. Lucy B. Perry                                     10.00
    Wanshara. Cong. Ch.                                        3.26


  NEBRASKA, $34.88.

    Camp Creek. Cong. Ch., $3.38; G. F. L., 50c.               3.88
    Exeter. Woman’s Missionary Soc., $15;
      “Cheerful Givers,” $3                                   18.00
    Fairmont. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
    Osceola. Cong. Ch.                                         3.00


  INDIAN TERRITORY, 50c.

    Darlington. E. G. T.                                       0.50


  CALIFORNIA, $50.50.

    Marysville. Miss M. A. F.                                  0.50
    San Francisco. Rev. J. Rowell                             50.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $5.00.

    Seattle. R. McComb                                         5.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

    Washington. Dr. J. W. Chickering, Bundle of C.


  NORTH CAROLINA, $2,250.00.

    Raleigh. Sale of School Property                       2,250.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $29.45.

    Alameda. Tuition, Books, &c.                              29.45


  TENNESSEE, $381.00.

    Nashville. Mrs. A. M. H., 50c.; H. C. G., 50c.             1.00
    Chattanooga. Rent                                        380.00


  GEORGIA, $44.75.

    Macon. Rent, $9.75; Cong. Ch., $5                         14.75
    Savannah. Rent                                            30.00


  ALABAMA, $94.90.

    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                         53.05
    Mobile. Cong. Ch.                                         35.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                           4.85
    Talladega. Rev. J. B. Grant, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            2.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $4.00.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U.                                      4.00


  TEXAS, $2.20.

    Corpus Christi. First Cong. Ch.                            2.20


  INCOME FUND, $3,912.00.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                             2,927.00
    C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                        50.00
    General Fund                                              50.00
    C. F. Hammond Fund                                       225.00
    Le Moyne Fund                                            660.00


  CANADA, $5.00.

    Sherbrooke. Rev. A. Duff                                   5.00
                                                           ————————
          Total                                           30,417.94
    Total from Oct. 1st to Sept. 30th                   $238,149.52

         *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Bridgeport, Conn. A. L. Winton, $25; Dea. E.
      W. Marsh, $20; Edward Sterling, $10                    $55.00
    Derby, Conn. Miss Sarah A. Hotchkiss                       5.00
    Hartford, Conn. Roland Mather, $100; Charles
      Seymour, $10                                           110.00
    New Haven, Conn. Gen. E. S. Greeley, $250;
      Mrs. Atwater Treat, $5                                 255.00
    West Haven, Conn. Cong. Sab. Sch.                         25.00
    Paterson, N.J. John C. Ryle, $50; George J.
      Tillotson, $25                                          75.00
    Grand Rapids, Mich. Ladies’ Home Miss. Soc. of
      First Cong. Ch., _for furnishing room_                  30.00
    Union City, Mich. I. W. Clark, $5; Individual, $1          6.00
    Fox Lake, Wis. “Friends,” Bbl. of C.
                                                            ———————
          Total                                              561.00
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1st to Aug.
      31st                                                 5,084.71
                                                            ———————
          Total                                           $5,645.71

         *       *       *       *       *

  FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

    From Oct. 1st to Sept. 30th                          $26,289.62

         *       *       *       *       *

  SCHOLARSHIP FUND.

    Streator, Ill. Mr. and Mrs. Ralph Plumb, _for
      Fisk University_                                     2,000.00

                                       H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
                                                 56 Reade St., N.Y.




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided that children and others who have
not professed their faith may be constituted life members without
the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less
than twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be
advisory, and the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counseling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and
agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the
transaction of all such business as usually appertains to the
executive committees of missionary and other benevolent societies;
the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
missionaries; and its doings to be subject always to the revision
of the annual meeting, which shall, by a reference mutually
chosen, always entertain the complaints of any aggrieved agent or
missionary; and the decision of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields of labor
and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor particularly to
discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the known fruits of
unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment those who hold
their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit; repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS. It has also a
mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Virginia, 1; North Carolina, 6; South
Carolina, 2; Georgia, 13; Kentucky, 6; Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14;
Louisiana, 17; Mississippi, 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 2. _Among the
Indians_, 1. Total 76.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas—8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon,
Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis,
Tenn.—12. _Other Schools_, 31. Total 51.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 284;
among the Chinese, 22; among the Indians, 11; in Africa, 13. Total,
330. STUDENTS—In Theology, 102; Law, 23; in College Course, 75;
in other studies, 7,852. Total, 8,052. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office as below:

  NEW YORK   H. W. Hubbard, Esq., Treasurer, 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON     Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Dis't Sec., Room 21 Congregational
               House.
  CHICAGO    Rev. Jas. Powell, Dis't Sec., 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all Clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath-schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
'American Missionary Association' of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes."

The Will should be attested by three witnesses (in some States
three are required, in other States only two), who should write
against their names their places of residence (if in cities,
their street and number). The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: "Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said (A. B.) as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses." In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         E. Ridley & Sons,

                   Grand and Allen Streets, N.Y.


                         Silks and Satins

                 For Dress and Trimming Purposes.

  150 PIECES BROCADED SATINS,}
  BLACK, ALSO CHOICE COLORS, } $1 05
  HAVE BEEN SOLD AT $1.50.   } PER YARD.

  ANOTHER LOT BLACK BROCADED, $1.15.
  SUPERB ASSORTMENT BLACK AND COLORS,
    $1.25, $1.35 AND $1.59.
  MOIRE SILKS (all Silk), $1.50, $1.75, $2 UP.

  50 PIECES COLORED SATINS DE LYONS,    }
    Selling everywhere $1.75 and $2. All} $1 25
    choice colors and shades.           }

  DRESS SILKS, DESIRABLE SHADES, 65c., 75c., 99c.,
    $1.15, $1.25, $1.35.


                           BLACK SILKS.

  1 LOT BELLONS GROS GRAIN,  88c.
  1 LOT PONSONS    DO.       95c.
  1 LOT DOMESTIC   DO.       98c.

ALSO FINER AT $1.05, $1.15, $1.22, $1.45, $1.65 AND $1.88.


                       VELVETS AND PLUSHES.

  SILK VELVETS, COLORS AND BLACKS, 65c., 75c., $1, $1.25.
  RICH BROCADE VELVETS, $1.40 UP.
  PLUSHES, BLACK AND COLORS, $1.50, $1.75, $2.
  SEALSKIN CLOAKING PLUSHES, $3.25, $3.75 UP.
  SEALSKIN PLUSHES, 36 inches wide, at $16.50,
    same as selling everywhere from $20 to $25.


                  LADIES’, MISSES’ AND CHILDREN’S

                         Cloaks and Suits.

                       HANDSOME LIGHT CLOTH

                      HAVELOCKS AND DOLMANS,

                    TRIMMED WITH PLUSH, $16.75.


                          DRESS FABRICS.

                    FALL AND WINTER NOVELTIES.


                        _Fashion Magazine._

We issue Quarterly THE BEST MAGAZINE ON FASHION PUBLISHED, largely
Illustrated, giving a complete


                            PRICE LIST

of our entire stock. Single Numbers 15 cents, or 50 cents per Annum.

               ORDERS BY MAIL PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.

                        EDW. RIDLEY & SONS,
                     309, 311, 311½ Grand St.
         58, 60, 62, 64, 66, 68 & 70 ALLEN ST., NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


              COPY OF THE REVISED NEW TESTAMENT FREE.


During the coming month we will send free by mail a copy of the
revised Edition of the New Testament (Oxford Edition, limp cloth,
red edges), a very handsome book, to any subscriber who will renew
his subscription to the WITNESS now, by sending us $1.50 by money
order, bank draft, or registered letter. Even if subscription
is not due until next year, by remitting the amount now, the
subscription will be extended and the Testament sent at once. This
is the edition authorized by the English and American committees,
and it contains a history of the revision and an appendix giving
the list of American corrections which were not concurred in by the
English committee.

A club of three copies of WITNESS for a year, directed separately,
will be sent for $4 remitted direct to this office, and also three
copies of this Testament.

A club of six GEMS OF POETRY for a year will be $4, and three
copies of Revised New Testament will be sent gratis with it.

A club of nine SABBATH READING will be sent for a year for $4, and
three copies of Revised New Testament gratis.

All directed separately and all postpaid.

Address,

                        JOHN DOUGALL & CO.,
                                 _No. 21 Vandewater Street, N.Y._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.

                      _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”

                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *




Annual Meeting.


The American Missionary Association will hold its Thirty-fifth
Anniversary in the city of Worcester, November 1-3.

On Tuesday, at three o’clock P.M., the Executive Committee will
render their Annual Report.

At 7.30 o’clock, Tuesday evening, the Annual Sermon will be
preached by Rev. C. D. Hartranft, D.D., of Hartford, Communion
following.

On Wednesday morning, papers will be read on topics of special
interest relating to the work.

Wednesday afternoon and Thursday will be occupied with Reports of
Committees and addresses thereon.

On Wednesday and Thursday evenings, there will be addresses from
Senator George F. Hoar, Gen. O. O. Howard, President M. H. Buckham,
and other distinguished speakers.

The Committees on hospitality, reduction of railroad fares, and
other matters of detail pertaining to the meeting, will be duly
published in the religious papers.

The Executive Committee proposes the following amendments to the
Constitution of the American Missionary Association to be submitted
to the Annual Meeting for action thereon, viz.:

  ART. III. Any person who contributes to the funds of the
  Association may become a member thereof for the current
  year by requesting to be enrolled as such at the time such
  contribution is paid into the treasury of the Association, and
  any contributor to the amount of thirty dollars, at one time,
  may, on request to that effect, be enrolled as a Life Member.

  ART. V. The Annual Meeting shall consist of the Officers, Life
  Members who have been such prior to the first day of October
  preceding the time of such meeting, such persons as have been
  enrolled as members within one year prior to that date, and of
  delegates from churches that have within the year contributed
  to the funds of the Society, and from State Associations
  and Conferences, each of such churches, associations and
  conferences to be entitled to one delegate.

  ART. VI. The officers of the Association shall be a President,
  Vice-Presidents, Corresponding Secretaries, (who shall also
  keep the records of the Association,) Treasurer, Auditors, and
  an Executive Committee of not less than twelve members.

  ART. VII. After “dismissing,” omit the parenthesis. Omit ART.
  VIII., and number ARTS. IX. and X. respectively VIII. and IX.

                 *       *       *       *       *


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, PRINTER, 101 CHAMBERS STREET, NEW YORK.




Transcriber’s Notes


Missing punctuation inserted and obvious printer’s punctuation
errors corrected.

On page 339, “neigborhood” corrected to “neighborhood”. (the entire
neighborhood enlisted)

On page 348 in the first New Britain entry, inserted missing “i” in
“Collins”.

On page 349 in the second Beloit entry, inserted missing “n” in
“and”. (Mrs. Keep and daughter)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 35, NO. 11, NOVEMBER, 1881 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.