Produced by Wayne Hammond and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






[Transcriber’s Note:

Text delimited by equal signs is bold.

Text delimited by underscores is italic.]




  ESTABLISHED IN      OLDEST BEE-PAPER
  1861                IN AMERICA

  The American
  BEE JOURNAL

  Weekly, $1 a Year. }      DEVOTED EXCLUSIVELY--TO      { Sample Copy Free.
                            BEE-CULTURE.

  VOL. XXXIII.      CHICAGO, ILL., JAN. 11, 1894.      NO. 2.




[Illustration: EDITORIAL

GEORGE W YORK. EDITOR]


=The Weather=, up to Jan. 5th, here in Chicago, has been more like fall
than winter. Reports seem to indicate that bees are wintering well, so
far.


=Mr. John Hager, Jr.=, of Arabi, La., has sent us a box of specimens
of honey-plants now in bloom in his locality, among them white clover
and golden-rod. We wish to thank Bro. Hager for his kindness, as it
is something unusual for us to see blossoms of honey-plants in the
month of January. Louisiana, as well as the other States in our Sunny
Southland, ought to be a Paradise for the bee-keeper and his bees.
Doubtless it only needs a little more push and energy to wonderfully
develop the bee-industry in that region of almost perpetual sunshine
and blossoms.


=Gleanings in Bee-Culture= for Jan. 1st, 1894, appeared with a few very
nice improvements. The principal one is the proposed “leading” of the
reading matter--that is, putting strips of lead or metal between the
lines, so that they will be further apart. This paragraph is “leaded,”
while “The Stinger’s” department in the BEE JOURNAL is “solid,” as
printer’s say.

This “leading,” Bro. Root says, will _reduce_ the amount of reading in
_Gleanings_ about _one-fifth_, and as Bro. Hasty, in the _Review_ for
March, 1893, figured that the BEE JOURNAL then contained over 16.000
more words of bee-reading per month than _Gleanings_, hereafter the BEE
JOURNAL will be more than ever at the head of the list in _quantity_
of bee-matter published; and as to _quality_ of contents--well, we
can safely leave that to our subscribers, whether or not it is up to
standard.

Bro. Root has also put in some nice new departmental headings, which,
with the “leading” of the type, give to _Gleanings_ an exceedingly neat
and tasty appearance.


☞ It is hardly necessary for me to say that the Italians are my choice
among all the bees that I have ever seen, either for comb honey or for
extracted.--_Doolittle._


=Bro. Pringle=, of Canada, who had in charge the Ontario honey exhibit
at the World’s Fair last summer, left for home on Dec. 21st. He
had been in Chicago ever since April 6th, being the first apiarian
superintendent to reach the Fair grounds, and the last to leave.

The day before departing for his Canadian home, Bro. Pringle kindly
called to bid us “good-bye,” at the same time bringing with him, for
“ye editor,” a quart jar of fine clear extracted honey, as a memento
from Bro. McEvoy, Ontario’s popular Foul Brood Inspector; also a pound
jar of honey from Mr. D. Chalmers, of Poole, Ont.; and, besides, a
beautiful one-pound section of honey as a slight remembrance from
Bro. P. himself. We want to thank all these friends for their “sweet”
expressions of good-will, and assure them that we very gratefully
appreciate their kindness and thoughtfulness.

We expect soon to give our readers a picture of Ontario’s magnificent
honey exhibit at the Fair, with full description of the same.


=The Wisconsin Honey Exhibit.=--At the annual meeting of the Wisconsin
State Bee-Keepers’ Association, in February, 1893, Mr. Franklin Wilcox,
of Mauston, Wis., was chosen to collect, prepare and arrange an exhibit
of honey and wax at the World’s Columbian Exposition. The sum of $500
was allotted by the State Board with which to make the exhibit.

The months of February and March did not prove to be the most favorable
time for collecting comb honey that should fairly represent the
State. After considerable correspondence, and some travel, Mr. Wilcox
succeeded in obtaining about 800 pounds of comb honey, 500 pounds of
extracted, and 200 pounds of beeswax, of the crop of 1892. Damages from
freezing and rough handling reduced the quantity somewhat before it was
finally installed at Chicago.

The rules of the Exposition Company sent out at that time limited the
amount from each exhibitor to 50 pounds of extracted, and 100 pounds
of comb honey, which prevented filling up the exhibit with a large
quantity of fancy honey from two or three exhibitors, as might have
been done with less cost.

Among those who furnished honey from the crop of 1892, were J. J.
Ochsner, of Prairie du Sac, who sent some of the finest comb and
extracted honey, also some choice beeswax; but the most attractive
exhibit by Mr. O. was his name and post-office address built of comb
honey by the bees in letters formed for them as a guide.

Mr. C. A. Hatch, of Ithaca, and E. C. Priest, of Henrietta, furnished
extracted honey and beeswax. Messrs. Frank McNay, Franklin Wilcox, and
A. E. Wilcox, of Mauston, each furnished comb and extracted honey and
beeswax. Messrs. Gustav Gross, of Milford, and Adolph Vandereicke, of
Lake Mills, contributed their best.

The extracted honey was nicely put up in glass jars, of different sizes
and styles, designed to show those commonly used in the retail trade.
It nearly all appeared on exhibition in the granulated form. This was
partly because Mr. Wilcox believed that people should learn to know
that pure extracted honey will granulate, and partly because he could
not give it time enough to melt it so often as necessary to keep it in
the liquid form.

[Illustration: _Wisconsin Exhibit at the World’s Fair._]

After completing the installation of the crop of 1892, Mr. Wilcox
applied to the State Board for funds to replace the old crop with the
new, when it should be ready. This was promptly refused, and Mr. W.
abandoned the exhibit for a time. About the middle of August, finding a
good crop of choice honey, and that other States had greatly improved
their exhibits, he again appealed to the Board for funds with which
to pay transportation and installation charges on the new crop, and
succeeded in getting the promise of $100 for that purpose.

As the time was short, he called for immediate contributions, and
obtained over 50 pounds from J. W. Kleeber, of Reedsburg, 300 pounds
from J. J. Ochsner, and 200 pounds from himself and son, with which he
replaced a portion of the old crop of comb honey.

This was arranged on five large arches, as shown in the illustration
herewith, with pyramids of honey underneath. Those columns with a
square base and two balls on the top are beeswax. The remainder of the
wax is in fancy balls, bells, hearts, etc., and may be seen on top
of the sections, glass and jars of honey. Mr. Ochsner’s letters do
not show very well in the picture. They were in the front end of the
showcase under one of the large arches.

The Wisconsin exhibit was entered as a State exhibit, and of course
individual exhibitors were unknown to the judges, consequently the
award was to the State as a whole.

As in the case of the Michigan exhibit, the success of the Wisconsin
display was mainly due to the untiring efforts and wisdom of one
man--in the former to Bro. Cutting, and in the latter to Bro. Wilcox,
whose picture is shown on another page. Both of these good men worked
faithfully and hard in securing and placing their respective exhibits,
and of course each won worthy and lasting honor, if not financial
reward. We trust that neither Wisconsin nor Michigan bee-keepers will
soon forget the two men who did so much to win new laurels to these
already much-crowned States.


=The Vermont= Bee-Keepers’ Association will meet in the Van Ness House
at Burlington, Vt., on Jan. 24 and 25, 1894. Among the topics to
receive attention are these:

 President W. G. Larrabee’s address, including a report of the North
 American Bee-Keepers’ Association meeting in Chicago.

 Experimental work: What has been done at the State Farm--O. J. Lowrey
 and T. H. Wheatley.

 Upward and entrance ventilation: How much for winter?--H. P. Langdon.

 Is spring protection necessary after bees are put out of the
 cellar?--M. F. Cram.

 Discussion: Advantages and disadvantages of shallow frames.

 Why is honey so much better flavored in some years than in others?--R.
 H. Holmes.

 How shall we manage our bees so as to secure the most honey?--E. J.
 Smith.

In the Secretary’s announcement we find the following paragraphs:

 The Van Ness House kindly donates the use of a hall for the
 convention, and reduces their rates to $2.00 per day, to those
 attending the convention.

 If you have any new or useful invention or article, please bring the
 same to the convention.

 If you live within reach of Burlington, don’t fail to attend the
 meeting, and bring your lady friends with you. All interested in
 apiculture are expected to come without further invitation. Bring your
 badges.

 The C. V. R. R. Co. have reduced their rates as follows: Return
 tickets--From stations within 33 miles of Burlington, 2 cents per mile
 each way, with minimum rate of 25 cents, and maximum rate of $1.00; 34
 miles and over, fare one way. Tickets are good going Jan. 23rd, 24th,
 and 25th, and good returning the 25th and 26th, between the following
 named places to Burlington: Malone and Ticonderoga, N. Y., Richford,
 Cambridge Junction, Rutland, and White River Junction.

  H. W. SCOTT, _Sec. & Treas._

 Barre, Vt.




[Illustration: GENERAL QUESTIONS]

ANSWERED BY DR. C. C. MILLER, MARENGO, ILL.

In this department will be answered those questions needing IMMEDIATE
attention, and such as are not of sufficient special interest to
require replies from the 20 or more apiarists who help to make “Queries
and Replies” so interesting on another page. In the main, it will
contain questions and answers upon matters that particularly interest
beginners.--ED.


Contraction--Improvement in Bees.

I tried contracting the brood-chamber of four colonies during basswood
honey-flow, and three of them would persist in building comb on the
vacant side of the dummy. One even got so far as to have quite a comb
there, (mostly drone-comb) with the queen laying in that side.

The combs in the brood-chamber were very nearly all worker, and instead
of the queen using them, and the bees storing above, they capped them
over half full of honey. They worked in the super some, but not like
bees ought to when there is a good honey-flow. They had, I think, five
Langstroth frames, maybe six.

I fitted a thin piece of board over the vacant part of the
brood-chamber. One of the four stayed “contracted” all right. It had
six frames. This one was a new swarm, and worked all right in the
super, but re-swarmed in August.

1. I would like advice on contracting, and how to do it. Ought I to
contract all summer, where the bees get enough honey to breed strong
all the time? Also, there is lots of pollen here all summer.

2. In Mr. Simmins’ essay on page 689 of the BEE JOURNAL for 1893, he
gives as one of his means of preventing swarming, the withdrawal of
the two outer combs, and inserting near the center of the brood-nest
two empty frames. Are not these empty frames apt to be filled with
drone-comb?

3. On the same page he speaks of rearing young queens in the fall to
requeen with, also as a means of preventing swarming. What is the
object of rearing them in the fall?

4. Would not cells saved at the swarming season do as well?

5. Where the bees of a neighborhood are about half blacks and half
Italian, or a good share hybrid, would you advise a person to try to
Italianize, suppose his bees were about half and half?

6. Where the bees of a neighborhood are two-thirds black, and you want
to produce comb honey mostly, would it be best to breed from your best
black queens, rather than to try to Italianize?

7. Don’t you think (of course the big queen-breeders don’t read this
department) that if the black bees had been bred as scientifically, and
as much care and study given them as has been bestowed on the Italians,
in the last 20 or 30 years, they would have been to-day as good, if not
better than the Italian?

  E. S. M.

Denison, Iowa.


ANSWERS.--1. I have contracted down to five, four, three, and in some
cases down to only one or two combs, having no combs built in the
brood-chamber. A division-board or a dummy was next to the comb or
combs left, and the space partly filled with dummies. One or two years
I filled in the vacant space with hay. If two dummies were put in next
the brood-comb, with half an inch space between them, there was no
trouble about combs being built in the vacant space left. But please
notice that there was no queen in the hive. Without a queen, bees don’t
seem so intent on building comb, but with a queen you would likely find
them clustering in the open space left beyond the two dummies, there to
build combs.

With the queen left in the hive, as in your case, you should have
filled up the vacant space in some way, so the bees couldn’t occupy it.
If the space for the brood-nest is limited, the tendency of the bees is
to build additional combs at the side, even if one or two dummies are
in the way. Perhaps it is not necessary to have the dummies so close to
each other as you get farther away from the brood-nest. At the farther
side, next the wall of the hive, the bees are not so likely to commence
building, even if the space is an inch or more.

I doubt if any one would advise you to contract all summer. I think
contractionists would tell you to hive a swarm on five frames, then
after those five are well occupied, and the bees working well in the
supers, to add the other frames. Some of them might perhaps tell you to
take out part of the frames from an old colony, but I rather think that
now-a-days contraction is mostly confined to swarms. I don’t, however,
count myself the highest authority on contraction, for after having
done a good deal in that line I have gone back to the plan of allowing
same number of combs summer and winter.

2. Yes, put an empty frame into the middle of a brood-nest at a time
when there was any likelihood of swarming, and I should expect a
good share of the comb built to be drone, especially if there was no
drone-comb in the other frames.

3. Bees having a young queen are not so likely to swarm as those
having an old one, and rearing a queen in a hive in the fall would not
interfere with the harvest as would rearing one before the harvest.

4. There might not be much difference, only the later a queen is reared
this year, the younger she will be next, and the less likely to swarm.

5. Yes, I’ve done that very thing, and I would keep on trying, for you
will not get through with the trying for a good many years.

6. No, I would do my best to work in Italian blood.

7. No, I hardly think so. Between you and me, I don’t think there has
been such an immense amount of science squandered on the breeding of
Italian bees. They are what they are, because of the surroundings in
their native habitat. While some have taken great pains in breeding, I
think a large number to-day would say that an Italian queen imported
from Italy 30 years ago was just as good as the average queen in
America to-day, and every year many queens are imported from Italy and
sold at a high price, which would hardly be, if there was no advantage
in it. And I don’t know that any one claims that any improvement has
been made in Italy, in the past 30 years.




[Illustration: Langstroth

Biographical]

No. 64.--Franklin Wilcox.


[Illustration: _FRANKLIN WILCOX._]

One of the prominent figures on the wonderful gallery of the
Agricultural Building at the recent World’s Fair, where were found
the more wonderful and beautiful exhibits of the apiary, was Mr.
Franklin Wilcox, of Mauston, Wis. We had never had the pleasure of a
personal acquaintance with him before the past summer, but now we feel
that in Bro. Wilcox, as in many other nice bee-folks whom we first
met the past year, we have indeed a good and true friend. So we are
glad to have this opportunity to also present to our readers another
leading bee-keeper--one who has done so much for advanced apiculture
in the State where he lives, and who takes such a deep interest in the
prosperity of all.

Like a great many of the famous men of the United States, Bro. Wilcox
had the good fortune to be born in the State of Ohio. We are not sure
that this fact has anything to do with his success as a bee-keeper, but
somehow we imagine there must be something encouraging in the feeling
that one hails from a certain locality where have come many who have
won deserved distinction, even to filling the highest position of honor
in the gift of the Nation. However that may be, at any rate Franklin
Wilcox was born in Hardin county, Ohio, in 1840. He moved to Wisconsin
in 1851, and settled in Juneau county, near where he now resides.
There being no school to occupy his mind, for a few years he spent
much of his time in the summer season hunting his father’s cows--for
pastures were bounded only by the horizon, and the cows seemed anxious
to find the outer edge; in the fall he frequently went with his father
bee-hunting, and there learned from observation some practical lessons
in bee-keeping, and we think he would spend a little time each fall
yet, in the woods, “lining up” the wild bees, if time would permit.

At the commencement of the late War, he went into the army and served
to the close, being wounded at South Mountain, Md., in September, 1862,
which disabled him from active service for one year.

At the close of the War he married, and settled on a farm where he
still lives. He thinks himself quite content with his comfortable home,
a good wife, and four children.

In connection with his farming summers and teaching a country school
winters, he kept a few colonies of bees, as some farmers do now, until
about the year 1877 or 1878, when he subscribed for the AMERICAN BEE
JOURNAL, and soon after added _Gleanings_, “Cook’s Manual,” and
several other bee-works. After a few months’ reading, he chose a hive,
and commenced bee-keeping in a new way, that astonished his parents and
some of his neighbors.

He now commences each season with from 200 to 300 colonies of bees, and
realizes as much profit from them as any farmer with the same amount of
capital and labor.

Mr. Wilcox has been the Secretary of a farmers’ mutual insurance
company for the past 15 years, which does business in four towns only,
and carries a capital stock of $500,000.

On a previous page is found a description and illustration of the
Wisconsin State apiarian exhibit at the World’s Fair, which Bro. Wilcox
superintended in such a pleasing and satisfactory manner.




[Illustration: In Sunny Southland]

  CONDUCTED BY
  MRS. JENNIE ATCHLEY,
  BEEVILLE, TEXAS.


Everything Booming in Texas.

I will now tell you about the weather up to date (Dec. 28th). We are
having summer weather, and the bees are just booming on wild currant,
which began to bloom about a week ago. The boys are to-day transferring
bees from 16 box-hives that they brought in last evening, and they say
that the robber-bees are not bad at all, as the bees are busy on the
currant bloom. To-day the thermometer registers 75° in the shade; at
sunrise this morning it was 66°, and at sundown last night 70° above
zero.

On Christmas day husband rode out some, and plucked an orange out of
Major DeGan’s orchard, where he saw trees bending with fruit of many
varieties of oranges; also the Japan plums were in bloom. The Major’s
fish-pond was partly covered with water-lilies, and stocked with the
finest perch he ever saw, and they were very gentle; they would come
right up to him for food. Then he went out to some of the many gardens
in Beeville, and found vegetables in great profusion--radishes, white
head cabbages, lettuce, mustard, English peas, new Irish potatoes, and
a great many other things too numerous to mention.

The lowest the mercury has been here up to date is 33° above zero, and
we are now having lovely weather, and everything shows a springlike
appearance. I will keep close watch of all the honey-plants, and at
the end of next season I will be prepared to tell all about them, etc.
If we have fine weather ten days longer, our strong colonies will fill
their hives with new currant honey, as it is very plentiful here.

We have drones hatching, and our swarming will begin about Feb. 15th,
or 45 days from now.

  JENNIE ATCHLEY.


Sending Queens by Mail.

I think Mr. Faylor is a little “off” when he says, on page 697 of the
BEE JOURNAL for November, 1893, that _no_ queens are any good after
being transported through the mails. The best laying queen, or one of
the best, I ever had, came clear across the ocean, by mail, from Italy.
She lived fully three years; and, in fact, I have received thousands of
queens by mail from different parts of the country, and do not remember
ever having a queen damaged in the mails in good weather. I have
received them nearly dead, and they turn up O. K. Still I believe some
queens are injured in transit, both by mail or in nuclei by express, as
I have received such reports.

But my opinion is, that nine-tenths of all the queens that arrive in
good condition by mail (that is, lively) are just as good as those
not so transported. There are hundreds, yes, I will say thousands, of
bee-keepers that can testify in this case, if they will. Please let
let us hear some of the evidences; the court is ready. This is a very
important question.

  JENNIE ATCHLEY.


Fruits and Vegetables.

As some friends have not yet gotten enough about southwest Texas, I’ll
tell them about the fruits and vegetables. Grapes grow and fruit the
heaviest here of any place I ever saw; some bunches of ripe grapes
weighing 2½ pounds, and very rich in flavor, and they always fruit--no
failures.

Oranges do well here, but have to be irrigated during the dry seasons.
I drove by any orchard yesterday that was loaded with ripe oranges, and
I tell you it was a pretty sight.

Bananas do only moderately well, but I do not believe the people here
understand their culture. There is hardly ever any ice here thicker
than a knife-blade, but I see the people wrap up and protect the
banana-trees.

Pears do excellently, and young trees grow into bearing very quickly,
compared to some countries. Blackberries, strawberries, raspberries,
dewberries, currants, and all small fruits do well here. Peaches do
well if the varieties are chosen that are acclimated to this latitude.
Apples only bear sparingly--it is too warm for them, and the trees do
not live long. The whole country here is covered or strewn with wild
currants, and they bear every year, and are very fine.

  JENNIE ATCHLEY.


Hints that May be Valuable.

If you wish nice yellow beeswax everytime, do not use any iron vessel
in rendering it. Use tin, brass or copper, as iron will make it dark.

Don’t rest too long, as you may lose considerable, and the “Stitch in
time saves nine” adage holds good in bee-keeping, surely. Have you got
your sections, frames, and the supplies all ready for next season? If
not, you had better see about it, as no bee-keeper in the world can
reap a full harvest, and be behind with his supers, hives, frames, etc.
It is always best to be ready, whether the harvest comes or not. But
should it come, and find the tub bottom up, but little is caught.

It is not best to ask too many questions when you start out in
apiculture. Remember that one idea learned yourself, is worth more than
if two were told you.

Remember that you may read agricultural papers for years, and without
any practice you are no farmer. It is the same with bees. It is right
and proper to learn all you can from others, but to be real successful
you must learn some yourself.

  JENNIE ATCHLEY.


Many Vegetables and Few Neighbors.

If a person doesn’t have all the vegetables he can use, it is his own
fault, as they can be raised at _any_ time of the year here. I notice
cabbages just beginning to head-up now, and tomatoes are plentiful, as
the vines seldom are killed by frost. Cabbages grow best in winter,
and, to make this short, I will say that people are making garden all
the time--while some are harvesting, others are planting. I planted
peas, lettuce, radishes and cabbages to-day (Dec. 14th). I have only
been here three months, and have raised one crop, and we do not have
the time to devote to our garden that it needs, to make a real success
of it, still we can, with very little trouble, have all the vegetables
we need.

Sweet potatoes, Irish potatoes, onions, carrots, artichokes, and celery
are all paying crops here. Every known variety of melons do well. There
are plenty of ripe water-melons now, and I see new vines coming up.

Now, all of this may seem flattering, but it is true, nevertheless.
But this is a new country, out from the towns, and thinly settled.
Willie and Charlie say they traveled nearly all one day--about 20
miles--without seeing a house, and it was a public highway, too, or
what we call a “county road;” so you see there is room here for _you_.
But you must be content to live without a near neighbor, for awhile, at
least.

  JENNIE ATCHLEY.


Grading of Honey.

I have lately been looking over some old bee-papers, and find that
the grading of honey has occupied considerable space, with but little
accomplished, as I look at it. Now, it is a very easy matter for us
bee-keepers to school ourselves, also easy to school the dealers, but
schooling the public is a different thing altogether, and I yet believe
that the simple figure plan is the best, such as No. 1, No. 2, No. 3,
No. 4, etc. For to get the consumers to know what grade of honey they
are buying, the grade should be on each section, the producer saying
something like this: If you wish honey like this, buy my No. 1 or No.
2, as the case may be. John Smith, producer, Chicago, Ills.

Every producer should mark his honey in plain figures, and then the
public will soon know how to buy honey, and these plain figures are
so easily read. Just think of White, Extra White, Superfine, etc.--too
much name for me. I shall brand what section honey I produce, No.
1, No. 2, No. 3, etc., and try to school my Southern consumers to
understand the meaning of the same.

  JENNIE ATCHLEY.


Resources of Honey, Etc.

I am told that everything that has thorns on it produces honey, and if
that be the case, there are but few shrubs that do not furnish honey.
West of this place, for 40 miles, or as far as I have been out, it is
thickly covered with shrubs, vines, etc., not much taller than one’s
head, and I will name a few for the benefit of bee-keepers who might
wish to make inquiry.

Catclaw is very thick in places, so thick that cattlemen sometimes have
to pay Mexicans a big price to go into the catclaw brush and “round
out” their cattle. “Waheeah” is another sticky brush that is very
plentiful, and a good honey-producer. “Wesach” is about the earliest
bloom we have--now ready to bloom--and fine for bees. Then we have
black and white chapparal, both good for bees. Mesquite is here in
abundance, and also yields honey, and there are a great many other
plants that yield honey that I know no name for.

And now, while the honey-producing plants have thorns, the bee-keeper
feels some of them, in the way of drouths, skunks, cutting ants,
moth-worms, and other drawbacks; but if one will make up his mind to
overlook these troubles, he will find this a fine bee-country.

  JENNIE ATCHLEY.


=Bro. Chas H. Thies=, of Steelville, Ills., has been greatly bereaved
in the death of his mother on Dec. 19th. In a kindly letter written to
us on Christmas Day, he speaks thus tenderly of his blessed mother:

 FRIEND YORK:--While I have never met you, and you have never met me
 or any of us knowingly, yet I feel as though I could divide my sorrow
 by writing you a few lines. In the past years, when I felt troubled
 or sad, I could tell my mother, which seemed to unload just half of
 my trouble, and she was always very glad to share in our troubles and
 sorrows, as well as in our joys. But since Tuesday, Dec. 19th, she has
 not been with us, for God saw fit to take her Home, where sickness,
 pain or death will never more reach her.

 She told us before going, that she would like to stay with us longer,
 but that if God wanted her she was ready to go.

 We are all grown up, and do not need a mother to supply us with our
 daily bread, etc., but yet we should have been glad to have had her
 with us a few more years. We are trying in this case, as in many
 others, to say, “Thy will be done,” yet it seems a little harder now
 than in many cases, particularly for my aged father, who is now 70
 years old.

 But one thing we are glad of, mother did not suffer long. If each of
 us only can truly say, when our time comes, “I have fought a good
 fight,” we have the assurance of meeting her again.

  Yours very truly,
        CHARLES H. THIES.

[Yes, Bro. Thies, one by one our loved ones are passing to the other
side of the river, and we all will soon be called to follow. Then “what
a meeting and a greeting” there will be!

Although we are personally acquainted with but few of our readers,
yet in their sorrows as well as joys, we feel deeply interested, and
wish to assure them that especially in the sad hours of bereavement
they have our sincerest sympathy. Surely, we are only a large family,
and of all folks bee-keepers, it seems to us, are more interested in
each other’s welfare than are any other class of people on this earth.
Please remember, then, that the BEE JOURNAL is always ready to hear
from its large family of readers, and, whenever possible, will be only
too glad to help them.--ED.]




[Illustration: QUERIES AND REPLIES]


Queenless and Broodless Bees.

 =Query 905.=--If the queen and all the brood of a colony were removed,
 1st. Would the bees thus suddenly deprived, stay in the hive, or
 scatter around? 2. Would they (after the first two or three days of
 mourning for the queen) go to work and store honey?--Tenn.

I don’t know.--EUGENE SECOR.

They would speedily be “no more.”--WILL M. BARNUM.

1. Most of them would scatter around. 2. No, or very little.--DADANT &
SON.

1. Scatter more or less. 2. Store some. Not profitable.--P. H. ELWOOD.

1. Stay in the hive, as a rule. 2. Some, but in a very discouraged
way.--J. H. LARRABEE.

1. They would be likely to scatter around. 2. It is doubtful if they
would.--J. M. HAMBAUGH.

1. I think they would leave, as I have seen swarms do in early spring
that had no queen.--JAS. A. STONE.

They would stay and work until they died of old age. then the worms
would destroy the combs.--E. FRANCE.

1. They will stay in the hive. 2. They will store honey, but will be
robbed in a short time.--H. D. CUTTING.

I have never tried this, and can only guess what would happen. Better
try it, and report results in the BEE JOURNAL.--C. H. DIBBERN.

1. They would not all abandon the hive unless they were robbed or had
no honey. 2. They would not be apt to store much honey.--G. L. TINKER.

1. Yes, they would stay at home. 2. Yes, if there was nectar to be
gathered, but they would soon dwindle out in the working season.--MRS.
J. N. HEATER.

1. They would stay. 2. I was not aware that bees quit their “job,” and
went into mourning for a queen. Mine don’t--they keep at work.--A. B.
MASON.

1. They would stay in the hive. 2. They would go to work, but not in
the brisk condition that they would if the conditions were normal.--J.
P. H. BROWN.

1. They would stay in the hive. 2. They would store honey tolerably
well, and that without devoting even two or three days to mourning.--R.
L. TAYLOR.

1. They would stick to the hive. 2. No, they are hopelessly queenless,
and seem to be wholly discouraged. Such a colony will do practically no
work.--A. J. COOK.

Bees without a queen, or the means of rearing one, are discouraged, and
manifest little interest in life, knowing by instinct that their “time
is short.”--MRS. L. HARRISON.

1. Much would depend; they might not, sometimes they do one thing, and
sometimes the other. 2. I have known them to do so; ordinarily I do not
think they would.--J. E. POND.

1. Sometimes they would, and sometimes they wouldn’t. 2. If they staid,
they would use their opportunities for storing, without waiting two or
three days to mourn.--C. C. MILLER.

1. I am sure I cannot tell. I can see no reason why any one should
treat a colony of bees in this way. 2. I do not think they would. Try
it, and then you will know.--EMERSON T. ABBOTT.

1. They would stay in the hive, but would do little work, and would
rapidly dwindle away. 2. They would get along much better if allowed
some brood, or even a single queen-cell.--J. A. GREEN.

1. They would run all over the hive and fly around, looking for their
queen, or “scatter around,” as you put it. 2. Yes, to a certain extent,
but not as much as they would have done had the queen been left with
them.--G. M. DOOLITTLE.

1. They would likely stay, especially if they were Italians. 2. Yes,
some. All colonies would not act alike. Some will not store much honey
even with a young queen in prospect, until they get her; others will
work well while rearing a queen.--S. I. FREEBORN.

1. They would probably stay. 2. I know a case of this kind. A bee-tree
was cut in the early summer, the bees were put into a hive, but the
queen was killed. The dead queen was suspended in the hive against the
cover. The bees filled the hive one-third full of comb and honey.--M.
MAHIN.

1. Some irritable bees will swarm out, but they usually return and
assume the same attitude of other queenless bees. 2. Yes, they store
honey, but probably with not as much vim as with a laying queen, but
usually they store more honey, as none is used in brood-rearing. But
somehow I never did gain much by caging queens during a harvest.--MRS.
JENNIE ATCHLEY.

When treated in this way they show great excitement for several days,
but they will generally submit to the inevitable, and in some cases
they will store honey rapidly--if nectar is abundant--and in other
cases they will do but little good. But if you will give them a bit of
comb containing young larvæ to build queen-cells, they will work all
right.--G. W. DEMAREE.


“=The Honey-Bee=: Its Natural History, Anatomy and Physiology,” is the
title of the book written by Thos. Wm. Cowan, editor of the _British
Bee Journal_. It is bound in cloth, beautifully illustrated, and very
interesting. Price, $1.00, postpaid; or we club it with the BEE JOURNAL
one year for $1.65. We have only three of these books left.




[Illustration: CONTRIBUTIONS]


Mailing Queen-Bees Long Distances.

_Written for the American Bee Journal_

BY W. A. PRYAL.

Although a number of queen-breeders of this country have been fairly
successful in shipping queens to foreign lands through the mails,
still, a few of these breeders, as well as many others who have not
been favored with a foreign order, have been pretty unlucky in sending
queens across the continent of America at certain times of the year.
One would think that if a man who has been successful in shipping bees,
say to Australia, would also send them every time to any part of the
Pacific Coast without losing a single bee. Yet, such is not the fact.
I have known of breeders who have sent their queens almost everywhere,
but who cannot send them to California without frequently losing some.

There are many causes for this, some of which I shall try to tell about
in this article. What I shall write about will be based altogether
on observations and experiments last summer. In carrying on these
experiments, I did it not only for my own benefit, but also for the
benefit of the queen-breeders of the country. It had become annoying to
me to receive a queen dead, that I was hoping would come to me alive.
Sometimes I would have a colony to which I wanted to introduce an
Italian queen, and expected one from the East in a few days. I would,
consequently, let this colony remain queenless, as I hoped to give
them the queen which I expected in a day or two. But how provoking it
would be when the queen, which was expected with so much anticipation,
came to hand as dead as dead could be. This state of affairs not
only happened once, but a number of times. It was for the purpose of
learning a way to get queens to this State alive every time, that I
gave a good deal of attention to the subject. That I learned something
of value, I am satisfied; that my experiments will be of value to those
breeders who ship to these distant parts, I also hope.

When I would get one of these queens dead, I would first look to see if
the food in the cage had given out. In no case have I ever found that
the food was anywhere near exhausted by the bees. More often the food
would be hardly consumed; sometimes it was so hard that I would not
be surprised but it would have required a good sized sledge hammer to
break the so-called candy sent as food for the poor bees to exist on
while in transit.

Then I would look to the ventilation. This I have considered an
important thing in shipping queens; too often the shipper trusts to
the ventilation provided by the manufacturer of the cages he uses.
For short distances, these ventilation holes made by the manufacturer
are quite sufficient, but for long distances and through a very hot
country, they are far from being just right. It is well that the maker
does not undertake to make them as open as a saw-mill, for they would,
in the language of Bill Nye, allow too much atmosphere to enter them.
This would not do during the early or late months of the year, should
the breeder have occasion to ship at those seasons.

I find that one of the reasons that much of the candy used in the cages
becomes hard, is because the wood of which the cage is made soaks
up the moisture of the candy; in other words, the honey, of which
the candy is partly composed, is absorbed by the wood. This state of
affairs is easily remedied by coating the hole, where the candy is to
be stored, with beeswax or paraffine. This should also be done, as it
prevents the candy from becoming poisoned by the wood, as is sometimes
the case.

Another thing that I learned was unnecessary during the heated term of
the year was, that it is dangerous to send too many bees along with
the queen. I have found that some breeders will send as many as 16 in
a two-ounce cage during July, when nine or ten were plenty enough. One
breeder had the former number in an ounce cage; it stood to reason
that so many bees raised the temperature in the cage to a very high
degree when the bees were crossing the deserts where it is naturally
hot. No bees in the world could live through such a trying time as they
must necessarily be subjected to in a small compartment where each
individual bee helps to raise the temperature in a climate, which, as
I have said, is already too hot.

There is nothing so successful for feeding bees for a journey across
the United States as soft candy. The softer it is the better; the only
trouble is that we cannot use it as soft as we would like to. This is
owing to the fact that when too soft it is apt to run in the cage,
and not only daub the bees, but also the mails, should any of it get
outside the cage, as it will likely do if the bees do not eat it as
fast as it shifts about. Then, when it is soft, there may be trouble
by the bees that may happen to die during the trip, getting stuck in
the soft candy, so-called. Should several such dead bees get stuck
at the entrance to the food compartment, there may be a likelihood
that the remaining live bees may not be able to get to the food, and
consequently starve to death.

So, from all these things, I think that while the Benton queen
shipping-case is a very good one for shipping queens several hundred
miles, it will have to be modified somewhat for sending such insects
long distances, without making it as large as the export cage, which I
find to be a very good cage to send bees in to even this State. Though
this last-named cage is about the best cage I have seen for getting
queens alive to this part of the world, it is too large for shipping
dollar queens in, as the breeder cannot well afford to pay the extra
postage and cost of such cages just for shipping a queen for which he
only receives 100 cents. And yet, considering the fact that if the
queen is shipped in one of the smaller cages, and she should die before
she reaches the purchaser, the shipper would have to replace her, it
would be cheaper in the long run for the breeder to have used a larger
cage in the first instance. But as my experiments have been directed
toward using as small a cage as possible, and yet secure the same
results as if a large cage were used, I shall confine my observations
to such lines, as, in truth, I think I have been doing.

North Temescal, Calif.

  (Concluded next week.)


=The Ladies’ Home Journal=, of Philadelphia, Pa., and the BEE
JOURNAL--both together for one year for only $1.65. The first-named
journal is the grandest monthly for the home that is published in
the world to-day. New or old subscribers to either journal can take
advantage of the low rate of $1.65 for the two papers. This offer
expires on Feb. 1, 1894. Send all orders to the office of the BEE
JOURNAL.


Wintering Bees in the Cellar.

_Written for the American Bee Journal_

BY M. M. BALDRIDGE.

On Dec. 4th the thermometers in this city said it was from 12° to 18°
below zero. In my bee-cellar, where I have 28 colonies, my thermometer
said it was 44° above zero at that time, and that is the lowest I have
seen it to this date (Dec. 11th). The highest temperature since Nov.
15th (the date my bees were put into the cellar), that I have noticed,
is 50°, but I presume it has been as high as 55°, and perhaps 60°. The
range of temperature anywhere between 40° and 60° is satisfactory to
me. This will make the seventh winter, I think, that I have used this
cellar for bees, and I do not recollect that I have ever lost a colony
of bees in it. I have sometimes found in the spring, after the bees
have been out-doors awhile, one or two queenless colonies, but that I
do not of course attribute to any fault with their winter repository.

In placing my bees in the cellar, I prefer to give each hive some
slight ventilation at the top, by raising the cover the thickness of a
6-penny wire-nail, one at each corner. I leave each entrance open the
entire width of the hive. No cloths, summer or winter, are used on or
about my hives, as I have no use for them. As before stated, I prefer
to lift up the hive-cover slightly while in winter quarters; still, I
have some winters left some of them waxed down, and I did not notice
in the spring but that such colonies were in just as good condition,
and with combs as bright and free from mold, as the others. Either plan
seems to be all right, according to my experience, when the temperature
ranges from 40° to 60°; but perhaps I had better add that the air in my
cellar is about as dry and free from impurities as the living rooms of
a house should be.

There are three windows to my cellar, and these are left open the
entire summer, and closed only just prior to the date the bees are
carried in. During the winter I, or some other member of my family,
go into the cellar almost every day. The part where the bees are, is
divided off by a board partition, but the door that opens into the
bee-room is seldom shut, and then only during an extremely cold spell.
I keep the entire cellar dark, and never hesitate to visit the bee-room
whenever I so desire, as I do not believe even frequent visits therein
do a particle of harm. But one thing I seldom neglect, which is, to
keep the dead bees swept up from week to week, and removed from the
cellar. This prevents tramping on them, and thereby avoids bad smells,
or a tainted atmosphere.

My hives while in the cellar occupy but little room, as they are
arranged in tiers, five colonies in each tier, and the tiers not more
than six inches apart. The bottom hive in each tier is kept about a
foot above the bottom of the cellar.

My hives are the “shallow things,” only seven inches deep inside the
frames, but I do not see but the bees winter as well in them as in
deeper ones, side by side, and, in general, I think a little better.
But were it otherwise, I should prefer to use such hives to deeper
ones, and for reasons too numerous to mention here. I have now used the
7-inch frames since 1876, the year I was keeping bees in the city of
Shreveport, La., and 17 years’ experience with them has taught me that,
whether North or South, East or West, I would not use a deeper frame.
No, sir; not if made a _present_ of as many hives as I might desire to
use!

St. Charles, Ills.


Bees Improving Themselves, Etc,

_Written for the American Bee Journal_

BY DR. E. GALLUP.

The second season after moving to Iowa, I had occasion to go to
Postville on the stage. At Decorah we stopped for dinner, and to change
horses. I saw a man in a back yard all bundled and tied up from head to
foot. As I approached to see what was up, he ordered me away, saying
that I would get stung to death, etc. But seeing that he was at work
with bees, I still advanced, but he said very excitedly, “You foolish
man! I tell you to keep away from here, or you will certainly get stung
to death!” I remarked that bees very seldom stung a fool, etc.

On inquiry, I found that he was to receive $5.00 for destroying a very
powerful colony that had been in a large hive for a number of years,
had never swarmed, and had become so vicious and strong in numbers that
it was dangerous to live in the neighborhood.

Here was the largest honey-bees that I ever saw, without an exception.
They looked as though they were a cross between a common honey-bee
and a bumble-bee--large, light-grey, hairy bees, with quite a flat and
stubbed abdomen. Their wings were more like a drone than a worker,
etc. The operator said that they were vicious Italians. One thing was
certain, he went about the operation of destroying them in the most
awkward manner possible.

Now, in this case, and all the cases that I mentioned last week, were
where bees had improved themselves, especially in size of colonies,
working qualities, etc. Thinking the matter over, and dreaming of large
bees, large hives, large colonies, etc., for a long time, led me to
get up the large twin hive that Mr. Doolittle mentions in one of his
articles. My standard hive contained 12 Gallup frames. My first large
hive contained 4 times 12, or 48 frames--24 in front, and 24 in the
rear. The balance of large hives that I made contained 36 frames--18 in
each end. By closing the passages between the two apartments, I could
work two colonies in each hive, if my plan did not work to suit. But I
never worked two in a hive.

My first and earliest natural swarm I hived in the largest hive,
confined them to one end, and used a division-board. As soon as
they commenced building drone-comb, I filled out with ready made
worker-comb, and just before basswood bloom, opened the passage-ways,
filled up with comb, and spread the brood one-half in one end and
one-half in the other. The queen was from my Grimm-Hamlin stock, and
extra prolific, and she spread herself grandly in the laying business.
We had the best and longest basswood bloom that I ever saw, and I took
from that hive, by extracting from one end one day and the other end
the next day, 600 pounds of honey in 30 days--not by actual weight, but
by measure. It was so thick and matured that it all candied in short
order, that I took out that season. I took in all about 750 pounds
for the season, besides what was left in the hive, and it was left
completely full. This was all the product of the bees of one queen.

The following season none of my large colonies swarmed, but all
superseded their queens. Their queen-cells were extra large, and
contained extra-large queens, with the largest amount of royal jelly
left in the cells that I had ever before observed. Now, you had
better believe Gallup “hollowed” and swung his old hat! He had got a
non-swarmer, a great honey-yielder, etc. You could hear him from Maine
to California--through the AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL. In fact, they heard
him in Germany.

But the third season the colonies in large hives were the first to cast
swarms nearly 3 weeks earlier than those in my standard hives, and here
was another dilemma. The swarms were so large that I had to pile up
three standard hives on top of each other, in order to get the bees all
in.

The fourth season they cast swarms again, but here was another
drawback: the fall was an extra open one, and they piled in so much
pollen that they nearly ruined one-half the combs, and then having so
much pollen they got the diarrhea before spring, and dwindled badly.
But I demonstrated one fact, which I believe to be a fact, that one
can rear long-lived queens large and prolific; also that their workers
are longer lived than ordinary, else how could all those extra-large
colonies that I have mentioned, both blacks and Italians, keep up their
extra-large number of workers the entire year?

I forgot to mention that I had two ¾inch holes in the ends of those
hives--one near each side at the top, and when the bees were gathering
so rapidly, one could see the stream in early morning passing out of
those holes, thus demonstrating that evaporation of nectar was going
on very rapidly inside the hive. Water would also be dripping from the
lower entrances. We understand that a portion of that probably was from
the breath of the bees.

Now we have demonstrated, at least to our own satisfaction, that bees
can _certainly_ be improved under judicious and intelligent management
instead of retrograding; and the great wonder to me is, that they have
held their own under the bad management of as large a proportion of
queen-breeders as we formerly had.

Now, Mr. White, your argument that the blacks are superior to Italians
because one can rear black bees from Italians under unnatural and
unfavorable conditions, is about like the argument of the large
queen-breeder that I before mentioned, who claimed that when he tried
to rear queens from the eggs or larvæ just hatched, many of the larvæ
sealed up were not larger than kernels of wheat. You see that he was
rearing them under the greatest possible unfavorable and unnatural
conditions, hence his argument was drawn from false premises.

You can readily see how the old man Gallup hollowed and swung his hat
about his non-swarmer, etc., before he was “out of the woods.” No
wonder that bees are afraid to sting him! I have always held that bees
seldom sting a fool, for that was the most satisfactory answer that I
could give to a majority of people that asked why they did not sting
me. Of course I _have_ another reason, but that is the quickest and
easiest manner of disposing of the question, and proves satisfactory to
a majority of questioners.

By the way, I am asked why, in my method of queen-rearing, I kept
the colony five days before giving the brood. Because the bees were
all young, or nursing-bees, and it takes about that time before a
sufficient number become outside gatherers, and we want all the
favorable conditions possible.

Santa Ana, Calif.


Foul Brood and Its Propagation.

_Written for the American Bee Journal_

BY RANDOLPH GRADEN.

It was gratifying to me to see such persons as Messrs. Hutchinson,
Muth, and others differing from Mr. McEvoy’s treatment of foul brood.
Still, I do not intend to be understood as meaning that Mr. McEvoy
cannot cure foul brood by his method, as the word “foul” is a German
word, and its meaning is “rotten,” and any decayed, dead brood may be
called “foul brood;” but I do know from experience that Mr. McEvoy’s
method will not cure the disease that I had to contend with here in
Michigan, for hives and frames used without first being disinfected,
would soon become diseased. I have never destroyed any hives or frames,
but have always kept them in use after being disinfected.

Mr. McEvoy says that frames are so cheap that they might as well be
burned; still, I can disinfect the frames as fast as they can be nailed
together, say nothing about the cost of the frames, and time and
trouble in getting them from the factory.

What seems to me very queer is, that soon after my article appeared
in the BEE JOURNAL about a year ago, I received a letter from the
President of the Ontario Bee-Keepers’ Association, asking for my method
of curing the disease, as he wished to bring it before a meeting to
be discussed. Now, why should they want my method when they have the
discoverers of the cause and cure of foul brood in their midst?

Since I discovered my method of curing the disease, I would not pay
the price of a 2-cent postage to know how others treat the disease;
but, then, they might want to know how to treat the foul brood that
some bee-keepers have in their apiaries in the United States, as it
appears from descriptions that the disease that myself, Messrs. Muth,
Hutchinson, and others have had to contend with, is different from that
experienced by some in Canada, that Mr. McEvoy has treated; more so
than the difference in the United States basswood and Canadian linden
honey. The honey might all be acceptable, but the disease that I have
had to battle with would not yield to any treatment that I have seen
made public, not excepting Mr. McEvoy’s.

Still, I saw in the BEE JOURNAL of Sept. 7, 1893, page 308, a challenge
to me, by which article Mr. McEvoy does me an injustice, in saying
that I warned bee-keepers not to be misled by him. Now, if Mr. McEvoy
had not been so hasty in his conclusions, and in misrepresenting my
words and meaning to the public, and had looked a little more carefully
at my article, that he referred to, he would easily have seen that I
only warned such as had my method (and not the bee-keepers at large)
to follow my treatment, and not be misled by Mr. McEvoy’s article or
method, as I am just as much interested in the success of my method of
treatment as he is in his, no matter if I am but a wee bit of a fellow
compared with him, in the eyes of the public.

Now as to the challenge: Does Mr. McEvoy think that I have a foul
brood apiary, or kind of foul brood hospital here, so as to have a
foul-broody colony whenever I wish? If so, I must answer, No, sir!
Nor have I seen any foul brood in the last two seasons, for if I
had, I should have cleaned it out before this time. Nor am I able to
cause it (that is, such as I am writing about) with dead brood, as I
am not writing about the chilled or drowned foul brood of which it
seems Mr. McEvoy speaks, but such as I have had in my apiary, and such
as it appears that Messrs. Muth, Root, Hutchinson, and Mrs. Atchley
and others have described; but if I had a foul-broody colony, or if
Mr. McEvoy will wait until I can get one, and allow me to amend the
challenge as follows: The $100 each to be deposited in a savings bank
of Detroit or Wyandotte, Mich., subject to withdrawal upon the decision
of three judges (one to be selected by me, one by Mr. McEvoy, and
the third by the first two appointed), thereupon Mr. McEvoy to come
here, and in my presence treat a colony by his method as given in the
AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL, without disinfecting or scraping or cleansing the
hive in any manner but to put the bees back into the same hive that
they occupied when diseased--then, if after the lapse of 60 days they
are found to be in a healthy condition, he to take the $200; if not,
then it is to be given to me; and if he is willing to accept it in that
way, I will let him know when I get or find a foul-broody colony, as
I could not accept his challenge in the way he makes it, for several
reasons.

I said in my former article, that in my next I would give the reason
why I do not give my method to the bee-papers to be made public,
because when my article on that subject appeared in the BEE JOURNAL
about one year ago, I got quite a shower of letters of inquiries, the
first of which I answered at once, giving my method as best I could in
a hurry; but as each mail brought more letters, I saw it was impossible
for me to answer all, as some did not inclose as much as a stamp for
reply. So I thought I would reply to all in the BEE JOURNAL, but as I
got my method nearly ready to send to the BEE JOURNAL, I received three
very sharp letters, one of which was very insulting, and the address
not properly given. Now, to give my method to such as they--no, sir!
I thought I would rather lose a few dollars, than to let such as they
have my method, which cost me so much in bees, time and trouble.

Still, many that asked in good faith must be answered, as I have been
at bee-conventions and met many bee-keepers, and always found them the
cream of society, and as every bee-keeper in the land ought to have my
method, no matter whether his bees have foul brood or not, for what Mr.
McEvoy and some others caution bee-keepers against, I just recommend,
and _vice versa_. Still, the Doubting Thomases should not get my method
to laugh at and poke fun at, but to such I would say that I am ready
to put up $100 or $150 against the same amount, that if they will send
me a foul-broody colony that has enough bees left to form an ordinary
colony in May or June, and if after the lapse of 60 days I cannot
return them in a strong and healthy condition in the same hive and
frames (hive to be a single-walled, movable-frame), then I will forfeit
the $200 or $300; but if the bees are strong and healthy, then I am to
get the money.

So I had printed a very limited number of leaflets containing my
method, which are placed within the reach of all asking in good
faith, but as soon as they are gone, or enough to pay the printing and
expenses, no more will be sent out by me, as I will give it away to be
given as premiums.

I can agree quite well with Messrs. Muth, Hutchinson, Mrs. Atchley and
others, in regard to the disease of foul brood, except in regard to its
propagation or spreading. I think they mostly claim that honey is the
medium through which the disease is spread. Now I have evidence which
proves beyond a doubt that bees in robbing a foul-broody colony do
not carry the disease to their hives in honey, but I don’t wish to be
understood as saying that the disease cannot be carried in honey, for
honey that is extracted from foul-broody combs, where the foul matter
is thrown out of the comb into the honey, for such I have never tried,
for I always boil and skim it properly before feeding it to the bees.

In regard to the spreading of the disease, my observations have been
such that at times when a foul-broody colony was in my apiary, all
hives or colonies that stood near by became affected, and at other
times a strip or line in a certain direction from the first affected
colony for some distance every colony would become affected, and at
other times it would be some other direction, etc., while at another
time a diseased colony may stand and become quite rotten, and no bad
result to other colonies near by, which goes to show that it depends
entirely upon what kind of weather we have when the disease is in the
apiary, as the odor, which is nothing more than small particles of the
substance from which it arises, which is driven out of the hive by the
bees fanning at the entrance. Should the air be heavy, or such that
when smoke comes from a chimney it shoots upwards quickly, the disease
does not spread as fast as when the air is light so that the smoke from
a chimney comes to the ground and moves along the ground slowly, the
air carrying the deadly odor from hive to hive. Now, dear reader, did
it ever occur to you that this is one way in which the disease spreads?
For when the air is lighter, or the same as the particles of disease
or odor, it simply moves or floats around, and woe be to the hive or
colony that chances to be in its way!

Now here, in regard to that disease, I will give some food for thought.
Why do not such colonies of bees, that rob foul-broody colonies, always
become affected with the disease? I imagine I hear a long list of
persons who answers “They do;” while I say, emphatically, they do not!

Now, how many have had foul brood among their bees, that had some
colonies in the swarming season that were badly affected with the
disease, yet strong enough to cast a swarm, that swarmed and were
hived? If so, did you watch for the hatching of the first brood? and
was it diseased, or did the first brood hatch and appear healthy? If
so, why was it not diseased, for the bees came from a foul-broody hive
with their honey-sacs filled with the deadly honey?

Now those having my method of curing foul brood, if they will look
over the foregoing article, and at my method of treatment, they will
easily see how my method originated with me, and why I recommended some
things that others strictly forbid; also why I say that comb foundation
made from foul-broody combs, as made by the leading manufacturers, is
perfectly safe to use, unless it is exposed to the foul or diseased
matter, after it leaves the dipping-tank at the factory.

Taylor Centre, Mich.




[Illustration: CONVENTION

Proceedings]


The Illinois State Convention.

_Reported for the “American Bee Journal”_

BY JAS. A. STONE.

The Illinois State Bee-Keepers’ Association met at Springfield on
Dec. 12 and 13, 1893. The meeting was called to order by Pres. J.
M. Hambaugh at 11 a.m., and opened with prayer by Rev. A. H. Bates.
Welcome address was made by Col. Chas. F. Mills, and responded to by
Mr. S. N. Black.

The President announced at this point that a recess would be taken and
membership fees received. The convention then adjourned until 1:30
p.m., at which time the meeting was again called to order by Pres.
Hambaugh.

The President’s address was first in order, which was attentively
listened to because of its merits. The Secretary’s and Treasurer’s
reports were read and approved.

The committee on Legislative Bills reported, which report was adopted,
and the committee discharged.

The discussion on the Code of Rules for Fairs was taken up, and, on
motion, action on the same was again postponed until it should come out
in print in our forthcoming Report.

An essay was read by Geo. F. Robbins on the “Rights and Duties of the
Illinois State Bee-Keepers’ Association.”

Mr. Becker spoke to quite a length, and thought that by some mode of
procedure we should adopt some way of finding out the condition of
our neighbors’ bees as compared with our own, at intervals during the
working season.


BEES AND GRAPES.

Mr. Becker asked why bees did not work on grapes last year.

Mr. Dadant answered, because the dry weather did not cause the grapes
to crack, and added that he had starved bees to death on grapes, and
had, on one occasion, pricked a pin-hole in a grape, and it was the
only one on the whole bunch that was touched, and that only as far in
as they could reach.

Mr. Riehl, of Alton, said that bees could not injure sound grapes or
fruit, except over-ripe raspberries.

Mr. Vandenburg said that bees cannot puncture grapes--he was sure of
that.

A committee on resolutions was appointed, composed of Messrs. Black,
Smith and Stone.

A committee was also appointed composed of Messrs. Hambaugh, Poindexter
and Draper, to formulate plans by which a member’s honey can be put
before the public as pure.

A motion prevailed, that a committee on census be appointed, to decide
the best plan of finding out the monthly condition of the bees of the
members of the association. Messrs. Becker, Smith and Dadant were made
such committee.

A committee on Congressional Legislation was appointed, composed of
Messrs. Dadant, Draper and Poindexter.

The convention then adjourned until 8:00 a.m. the next day, and that
the members attend the meeting of the Horticultural Society in the
evening.


SECOND DAY.

At 8:00 o’clock a.m. on Dec. 13th, the meeting was called to order with
Pres. Hambaugh in the chair. The Congressional Committee reported a
resolution which was unanimously adopted, petitioning Congress to make
and enforce laws compelling those who adulterate honey, to name it with
its true name.


GETTING APIARIAN INFORMATION.

The committee on the same reported as follows, which was adopted as
amended:

_Resolved_, That on or before the 15th day of May, July, September and
October, the Secretary be instructed to send out a return postal card
to each of the members of the association, requiring reports as follows:

1st. The number of colonies.

2nd. The prospect of a honey crop.

3rd. The amount of honey gathered to date.

4th. Honey gathered No. 1 or not.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary to send the above report each
month to the bee-papers for publication.

  C. BECKER,    }
  J. Q. SMITH,  } _Com._
  A. N. DRAPER, }

The committee for the same reported (and the report was adopted)
favoring an experimental station to be conducted by a person to be
named by the State Bee-Keepers’ Association.

I will say here that the meetings in session in the State House failed
to get the required number--250--to secure their return one-third
rate. It was promised by the passenger agency, and when they found
we were all going to meet at the same time, they raised the required
number from 100 to 250. On account of their acts, the various societies
“resoluted.”

Resolutions of greeting were drawn by a committee for the purpose,
and adopted, sending greetings to the State Grange and to the State
Horticultural Society. The committee was composed of Messrs. Black,
Beall and Smith.

The election of officers for 1894 resulted as follows:

President--Hon. J. M. Hambaugh, of Spring.

Vice-Presidents--1st, C. P. Dadant, of Hamilton; 2nd, J. Q. Smith,
of Lincoln; 3rd, S. N. Black, of Clayton; 4th, Mrs. L. Harrison, of
Peoria; and 5th, Chas. Hertel, of Freeburg.

Secretary--Jas. A. Stone, of Bradfordton.

Treasurer--A. N. Draper, of Upper Alton.

Mr. Robbins offered a resolution of thanks (which was adopted) to the
Legislative Committee for their conscientious performance of the
duties intrusted to them. On motion, it was voted that each member
of the association be requested to send a copy of the resolution of
this society, relative to adulteration, to their various members of
Congress, with the solicitation of their assistance in having it
enacted into law.

Resolutions of greeting were sent to and received from the State
Horticultural Society, and the State Grange, all in session in the
State House at the same time.

Mr. C. P. Dadant read an essay at the evening meeting of the
Horticultural Society, on “The Importance of Bees in Horticulture,”
which was received with the best of feeling among the horticulturists,
many of whom are also bee-keepers.

A resolution was reported as follows, and adopted:

_Resolved_, That the Illinois State Bee-Keepers’ Association desire
to return their sincere thanks to the Hon. E. L. Merritt, Chairman
McKinley, and others in the House, and Senator Dunlap and others in the
Senate, for their valuable services in obtaining the appropriation for
the honey display at the World’s Fair.

The resolution of greeting from the State Horticultural Society was as
follows:

To our fellow co-laborers, the members of the Illinois Bee-Keepers’
Association:

BRETHREN:--Feeling that our interests are identical, although we each
aim to accomplish the same end by different means, you by extracting
the sweets from our blossoms; we (while you are deriving benefits from
the mixing of the pollen to fertilize and make our trees and plants
fruitful) expecting to derive our reward from the sale of the beautiful
fruit; we desire to extend to you the right hand of fellowship, and
wish you success in your effort to extend the production of honey;
and notwithstanding the fact that your bees may get their heads
together and plot for the eating of our grapes and other fruits, yet we
still have faith in the utility of the little bee as a helper to the
fruit-grower, and admire her industrious and business habits.

  HENRY AUGUSTINE, _Pres._

  H. M. DUNLAP, _Sec._


REPORTS OF BEE-KEEPERS.

C. P. Dadant, of Hamilton--Number of colonies, 350; increase, 30; honey
produced, 400 pounds of honey-dew and 500 pounds of Spanish-needle
honey. Bees in good condition for winter, packed out-of-doors.

Geo. Poindexter, of Kenney--Number of colonies, 90; increase, 3. Amount
of honey obtained, 2,000 pounds of clover, and 800 pounds of extracted
fall honey. Bees wintered in the cellar, and are in good condition
now. He clips the queen’s wings to prevent swarming, and believes in
ventilation to induce the bees to work in the supers.

A. N. Draper, of Upper Alton, had about 300 colonies in the spring,
and sold 60 colonies, with no increase during the season. He had about
enough honey to winter the bees out-of-doors, packed in forest leaves.
His bees are kept in four apiaries. He says that white clover was a
failure this year. He prevents swarming by having large hives, and
plenty of ventilation. He harvested the most honey from asparagus, of
which there are a hundred acres in the neighborhood. This honey is of
poor quality.

Chas. Becker, of Pleasant Plains, had 53 colonies in the spring, and
increased to 62. He took about 700 pounds of honey. The bees are in
good condition for winter. He grows small fruit in connection with
bee-keeping. For extracting he uses three sets of full frames--supers
full of comb to each hive. Induces the bees to go into the supers by
placing partly-filled sections in the middle of the supers. He raises
the hives from the bottom-board during the swarming season, and thinks
it prevents swarming, and induces the bees to work in the supers.

J. Q. Smith, of Lincoln, had 53 colonies in the Spring. Increase 23. He
had no honey until August, except honey-dew, which he fed to the young
swarms. In the latter part of August he got 1,800 pounds of fair fall
honey, principally heart’s-ease and sweet clover, with Spanish-needle
at the last. He wintered his bees on the summer stands, packing the top
with leaves, and no protection on the sides.

Geo. F. Robbins, of Mechanicsburg, had 60 colonies, spring count, and
increased to 80. He produced 1,100 pounds of honey, half comb and half
extracted. There was some honey-dew, and the balance heart’s-ease and
Spanish-needle. Bees are in good condition for wintering out-of-doors.
He covers the brood-frames for winter with honey-boards made of cheap
lumber and burlap, with chaff or leaves above. He covers some of the
smaller hives with larger ones, and fills the space with leaves.

Mr. Black asked Mr. Dadant if spring stimulating paid. Answer--If
properly done, it may pay. He used to practice it when they did their
own work, but quit it when they began to hire. Mr. Dadant thought that
bees wintered, and also went through the spring, better in the sun than
in the shade. He thinks the chaff hive a failure.

C. M. Beall, of Clayton, had 10 colonies in the spring, and no
increase. He had no honey except 150 pounds of honey-dew. The bees were
in good condition for wintering in the cellar. He has no winter loss in
the cellar.

J. M. Hambaugh, of Spring, had 115 colonies in the spring, and
increased to 120. He produced 1,000 pounds of extracted--half honey-dew
and clover mixed, the balance Spanish-needle of superior quality. His
bees were in good condition for wintering, partly in the cellar and
partly on the summer stands. He removes the honey-board for cellar
wintering and replaces it with a ventilator, giving air at the top.

S. N. Black, of Clayton, had 37 colonies in the spring, and 44 now. He
produced 150 pounds of mainly white clover, buckwheat and heart’s-ease
honey. Bees were in fair condition for wintering. He has but little
loss either in cellar or out-door wintering. He expected to put them
into the cellar this winter.

On motion by A. N. Draper, Article 5 of the By-Laws was amended,
changing the words “Upon the Executive Committee,” to “Upon an order
signed by the President, and countersigned by the Secretary.” Carried
by a two-thirds vote.

The convention then adjourned _sine die_.

  JAS. A. STONE, _Sec._


“=A Modern Bee-Farm= and Its Economic Management,” is the title of
a splendid book on practical bee-culture, by Mr. S. Simmins, of
England. It is 5¾ × 8½ inches in size, and contains 270 pages, nicely
illustrated, and bound in cloth. It shows “how bees may be cultivated
as a means of livelihood; as a health-giving pursuit; and as a source
of recreation to the busy man.” It also illustrates how profits may be
“made certain by growing crops yielding the most honey, having also
other uses; and by judgment in breeding a good working strain of bees.”
Price, postpaid, from this office, $1.00; or clubbed with the BEE
JOURNAL for one year, for $1.60.




[Illustration: RAND^oM STINGS]

FROM “THE STINGER.”


            Only a bee!
    Only a bee, as it flew through the air,
    And tried to hum the sweet elfin air.

            Only a bee!
    Only a bee, and yet when it stings,
    The air with loud cries of pain loudly rings.

            Only a boy!
    Only a boy, on mischief bent,
    Only a boy who was not content.

            Only a grave!
    Only a grave on yonder hill,
    Contains a corpse both cold and still.


The man who wrote that “poem” must have thought himself funny; to The
Stinger he was a--I don’t think I shall say fool this time, but I hope
the next time he tries his hand at rhyming, he will give us something
with more sense in it. No bee has yet driven a boy into an untimely
grave; the boy of these times cannot be killed so easily as the writer
of the above lines would seem to imply.

However, The Stinger would say to all boys bent on teasing the bees:
Keep away from the dear little insects until after they are fed, or
they might hurt you.

In casually looking through the November number of the _Review_, I
saw the name of Mr. H. A. Burch mentioned along with that of James
Heddon. I remember the time when the name of Mr. Burch figured quite
prominently in the pages of our bee-papers. It was he, I believe, who
used to furnish the delightful series of “Walks and Talks” for the
earlier volumes of the old _Bee-Keepers’ Magazine_.

These “Walks and Talks,” with some other articles that appeared in
the _Magazine_, gave it a tone that I do not find in any of the
bee-publications of this later day, I am sorry to say. It seems, that
although we have some very good writers on apiculture pure and simple,
still we have none of those classic writers of a number of years ago.
My taste may be somewhat vitiated, and I am unable to recognize the
beauty of style of the leaders in apicultural literature of the present
time.

If I remember correctly, it was the same James Heddon that I just
referred to, that found fault with the writings of “those literary
fellows.” Yet it is this same critic who has secured no less a writer
than the Mr. Burch I have mentioned above, to assist him in building
up his (Heddon’s) newspaper. While complimenting Mr. H. on his good
taste in securing such an eminent writer as Mr. Burch, I must say that
he was a little too severe on a class of writers who did much to make
apiculture what it is to-day.

It was such “literary fellows” as Langstroth and others who did much to
give us some books on bees that rank high as literary productions.

I am inclined to think that Mr. Heddon did not really intend to cast
any reflection on writers like those I have been mentioning, but he
wanted to head of such writers as the Rambler and the Somnambulist. It
was these, and nothing more!

The Stinger is not very well disposed toward those people who have the
running of the Agricultural Experiment Stations in the United States.
He believes that these Stations are, in the majority of cases, managed
by persons who are not in all cases fitted for the places they are
assigned to. There is a good deal of humbuggery about these matters; it
is too often that they are used to give some political fellow a berth
where he can draw down a good salary.

What I would like to see, is some way of making these Stations more
useful than they now are. Not all the men who are in charge of them are
competent to fulfil the duties assigned them.

A correspondent writes saying he was in hopes The Stinger would be
put into winter quarters and not taken out again until the spring.
The Stinger thanks the aforesaid correspondent, and would say that he
regrets that the witless correspondent did not sign his name to the
letter, that I might pay my respects to him in a way that would make
him sorry for his impertinence.

The Stinger is not the kind of a bear that has to seek some den
during the winter months; nor is he exactly like the bee that has the
misfortune of living in a cold clime. The Stinger is out every day in
the year, and if he does not come your way often, do not feel you have
escaped a pestilence. It is generally the man with a guilty conscience
that fears to have his misdeeds ventilated.

A correspondent has written me to know what he should do with his
surplus honey. The way I do when there is any surplus honey in our
house, after we have brought home a jar of honey, and it is not all
consumed at the first meal, is to put it aside until the next meal,
when the surplus will surely disappear.

Never kick a hive of bees when you are down; wait until you are up and
can run away.

Why is killing bees like a confession? Because you unbuzz ’em.--_Ex._




[Illustration: OUR

LETTER BOX

_REPORTS PROSPECTS &c._]


 ☞ Do not write anything for publication on the same sheet of paper
 with business matters, unless it can be torn apart without interfering
 with either part of the letter.


Wintering Finely--The Stinger.

The bees are wintering finely so far. They had a good cleansing flight
on Dec. 23rd and 24th. Last year was a very poor one for honey here, on
account of the severe drouth, but we hope for a boomer next year.

Say, do not let “The Stinger” sting so hard. He might lose his sting,
and die like the bees.

  G. E. NELSON.

Bishop Hill, Ills., Dec. 30, 1893.


Bees Did Fairly Well.

Bees did fairly well here the past season. The bees in this
neighborhood are nearly all blacks, and are mostly kept in round and
box hives, and but very little attention is paid to them. Mine are
Italians and hybrids, and are in good condition for winter. I am well
pleased with the AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL.

  A. T. MULL.

Knob Creek, N. C., Dec. 12, 1893.


Cherokee Strip No Good for Bees.

I will say for the benefit of Mr. Spencer, of Farmersville, Mo., that I
am well acquainted with the Cherokee Strip south of Hunnewell, Kans.,
and I have kept bees here (due south of his location about 60 miles)
for the last three years, and although I have a better location for
bees, my bees haven’t made their own living, nor do I think they will
more than one year in five, and my advice to all Strip settlers is, to
let bee-keeping for profit severely alone for the present.

  RUFUS WILLIAMS.

Crescent City, Okla. Ter., Dec. 25, 1893.


Had a Good Flight--Late Introducing.

Bees had a good flight on Dec. 11th. It was a beautiful day, and
they enjoyed it to its fullest extent. They are in good condition
for winter, after some feeding. I will remove to my own place in the
spring. It is a 40-acre farm, in a tolerably good bee-locality. I will
then make bee-keeping my main pursuit.

I got a queen from Texas when the ice was an inch thick here; there
was not a dead bee in the cage, and I introduced her safely while the
thermometer ranged from 20 to 25 degrees above zero.

I have Italianized nearly all my bees, and won’t I just enjoy
manipulating those yellow beauties next spring? If any of the
bee-keeping friends will do us the favor to call at Crystal Spring Farm
Apiary, they will be most cordially welcomed.

  EDW. SMITH.

Carpenter. Ill., Dec. 15, 1893.


Got Honey of Fine Quality.

One of my bee-friends calls on me very often for instructions. His
apiary is on the roof of his building. We had a good honey season. We
have had a very fine quality of honey in this locality, no dark honey
at all. My bees gave me a better average per colony than any that I
have heard from. I guess I have read every word in the AMERICAN BEE
JOURNAL this far, and have found some interesting points. Some are not
in accordance with my experience, though.

  J. H. BROWN.

Rochester, N. Y.


Did Very Little the Past Season.

My bees did very little this year. I got about 20 pounds of comb honey
per colony. I had two colonies of Italians, and they did nothing in the
supers, nor did they swarm. They are the meanest things to rob I ever
saw. They kept me in “hot water” all summer. I am tired of the yellow
rascals. Bees didn’t work any on white clover, and very little on
buckwheat. The season was very dry here. I had some Alsike clover, and
the bees worked on that for about three weeks.

  S. M. ROBERTSON.

Grey Eagle, Maine, Dec. 23, 1893.


Inventing New Things--A Frame.

I read Query 892, and was somewhat surprised at some of the answers
given by the 25 expert apiarists; and yet I am glad that the great
majority have not yet out-lived their day. The answers of some of them
sound like the arguments that I heard offered by old men (when I was a
very small boy) against the introduction and use of the double-shovel
plow, and the reaping and mowing machines, etc. Yet those that were
satisfied with the utensils then in use, soon fell in line, and were
as loud in praising the new as they had been in condemning them. But
we have to admit that there have been a great many bee-hives and other
fixtures patented that have proven to be detrimental, or an out-right
humbug, and, after all, this does not prove that there is nothing left
for the inventor to invent, that will be as useful as anything now in
use.

We have quite a variety of frames now in use; each one has its good or
bad qualities, according to the way it is used. Having this in view,
last spring I invented a frame that will always hang perpendicularly,
regardless of the position of the hive; will never warp or sag,
and cannot be eaten by the moth-worms. The queen cannot hide on it
anywhere. It will last a lifetime, and then will be just as good as
new. It can be used with or without comb foundation, the same as any
other frame. I tested nine of these frames the past summer, and got
nice, straight combs, with the center of the comb on the center of the
frame all the way around. I have extracted 7¼ pounds of honey from one
frame. The summer problem has been solved to my satisfaction. Now if
the bees winter on these frames all right, and I think they will, then
I will apply for a patent. I pack the hives in chaff under sheds 14
feet long, with nine hives in each shed.

  W. H. BURKEY.


Very Mild Winter So Far.

The winter has been very mild so far, and bees are in fine condition.
We expect a fine spring crop of honey, as we have had some nice rains
of late. We have had hardly any ice yet, and the bees fly freely almost
every day.

  W. H. WHITE.

Deport, Tex., Dec. 22, 1893.


How I Managed the Bees.

I put my bees on the summer stands on April 2, 1893, and found them in
bad condition. I had to move them about 12 miles over the rough roads,
and that didn’t help them. We had a cold, wet spring, and the queens
kept dying. I tried to rear some queens, but when they would fly out
to get mated, it was so cold and wet that they never returned. I sent
to Illinois for some queens, but they reported the same results, and
my colonies kept dwindling down, till out of 35 I lost all but 19,
and they were weak. I covered the hives at night with old carpet, and
put boards around them, and in the daytime I removed them to dry the
hives. As soon as it was settled weather, and they commenced gathering
honey, I opened the hives, spread the brood-nest, and put in one frame
between. I waited a few days, and spread again, and this time put in
two frames between. My hives being 10-frame Langstroth, that makes 5
frames of brood that we have.

I waited a few days and spread again, this time I put 3 frames in
between, and that made 8 frames of brood. I waited a few days longer,
then I put on a top hive, took out 5 frames of brood from the lower
hive, and put in the upper hive. I put in empty comb below in their
place, and filled the balance of the top hive with empty comb. I waited
about two weeks, and then took another hive, put in 5 or 6 frames of
brood from the lower hive, and filled in with empty combs as before,
and took the top hive and raised it, setting this empty one under it. I
waited a few days, then I extracted from the top hive, and raised the
lower one and put the top one under it.

I run my hives three stories high, and this way I had as high as 20
frames of brood in one hive.

We had a splendid white clover flow, but basswood did not amount to
much--it was too wet in the forepart of the season, but it turned dry
in the after part, and the blossoms dried it up. We got no fall flow on
account of the drouth.

I extracted 3,500 pounds of honey by the above method, and didn’t have
a swarm. I kept the brood-nest disturbed, and gave them plenty of room,
and oh, what strong colonies! I had to raise my hives and slip inch
blocks under the covers to let the bees pass in and out.

About the first of the second week of basswood I commenced to make
nuclei. First I made one of my strong golden Italian colonies
queenless, and let them rear queens; when they were about ready to
hatch, I formed the nuclei. I went to a colony and took out 2 frames
of hatching brood, and put into a hive. I put in one empty frame and
took out some frames of bees just hatched, from the mother colony, and
shook all in the nucleus. The reason I took young bees was, they will
stay, but old bees will go back. I waited a few days and gave them
two more frames of brood. Three days after I formed the nucleus, I
took a queen-cell from the colony I made queenless. Now my colony is
completed. In this way I wasn’t bothered with swarming, and increased
from 19 colonies to 50--all good, strong colonies, and took 3,500
pounds of nice, white honey.

  JOHN BOGGS.

Cazenovia, Wis., Oct. 23, 1893.


Very Light Crop--A Hive-Cover.

My honey crop was very light the past season, being only 250 pounds,
but it does not discourage me. I have 30 colonies in fine condition for
winter.

I send a model of a hive cover that I like very much, and all
bee-keepers who have seen it think it is good. The zinc is crimped
over at each end ⅛ of an inch. It makes a very light cover--weight 4½
pounds, and it is strictly water proof.

I will give a short description of the hive-cover. I call it “The
Favorite.” The zinc is 17 × 21-5/16 inches; the ends of the wood frame
are 4½ × 14¾; sides, 20-5/16 × 2½ inches; thickness of lumber, ⅞ inch.
Shiplapped all around ¾ inch deep, which makes it lap on the hive so
the wind will not blow it off, and it will not leak. This size is for
8-frame hives, Simplicity style, but it can be cut to fit any size
hive. I think this cover will suit Dr. C. C. Miller, as he likes a very
light one. If I have not made it plain, I will try again later.

  J. E. ENYART.

McFall, Mo., Nov. 30, 1893.


Another “Bee in the Ear.”

That account of the editor of the _Progressive Bee-Keeper_ having
trouble with a bee in his ear (page 649), sent a convulsive shudder
over me. Three years ago, while working in the apiary, a few bees got
inside of my veil. I paid no attention to them until one started with
a firm determination to go through my head by way of my ears. Just
how near she succeeded I would not like to say, but it _seemed_ as if
she had accomplished half her journey, and was still going further.
Well, to say I was scared the worst I ever was in my life, is putting
it mildly. When I tell you I take delight in robbing ordinary yellow
jackets’ nests with my naked hands in the hayfield, with a crowd of men
looking on at a safe distance, you will know I am not very timid around
bees, either.

My first thoughts were to run to the house, but I had taken but a few
steps when I realized that I would not be any better off there, as my
wife and family have never materialized yet. As a last resort I turned
the smoker in my ear full blast, and the bee came out, or I believe I
would not be here to tell the story.

No person has any idea of the great terror it brings over one, without
a trial. Who will be first among the many bee-keepers, to bring forth
an invention to slip over the ears, having a screen in order to not
interfere with the hearing? I will give up all my part, and only ask
that the inventor deal liberally with his customers.

  J. H. ANDRE.

Lockwood, N. Y.


Look Before You Leap.

This is the leisure season, and people gather around the warm stove
to “cuss” and discuss the merits and demerits of different sections
of our great country, some favoring one State and some another, some
favoring South, some East and West--any place but cold Minnesota. I
spoke of Texas. One of our townsmen spoke in regard to Texas, something
after this style: You don’t know what you (as a Northerner) are talking
about. Just after the War closed, there were eleven families that left
Osakis for Sherman, Tex., and all came back that could. I tell you
a person from the North has no business down there. I left here in
January, and got back in June, and I have located on a farm here for
life.

The cemetery at Sherman has three little graves marking the
resting-place of our three little children, all being taken from us
in three weeks. My wife being sick, she thought it advisable to go
North again; she barely survived to get back, but soon recovered, and
three more children blessed our home, which are with us, plump and
healthy; while children in the extreme South resemble calves reared on
“skim-milk.”

  W. T.

Osakis, Minn., Nov. 29, 1893.


Extracted Honey for Farmers, Etc.

The past year has been one of the poorest of all the poor years of the
past, in my locality. The bees were so weak from poor wintering, and
the cold, wet, backward spring made it impossible to get them ready for
the harvest from clover. The flow from clover was very good; basswood
was only fair, the bloom not being very profuse. At the close of the
basswood season a long and protracted drouth set in, which “done up”
everything brown. Bees here are very light in stores.

I worked a part of my colonies for extracted honey the past season.
I used up all my empty combs that were vacated the past winter and
spring. It was my first experience with extracted honey. I think it is
just the way when the bees are not up to the required pressure for comb
honey. If the farmers who keep bees would use the extractor, and give
their bees plenty of combs at the right time, they would get more from
their bees than they do. It requires a specialist to make a success at
comb honey.

My best colony gave me 150 pounds of extracted honey, and my average of
comb and extracted was about 20 pounds per colony, spring count. The
increase was about 25 per cent.

I have some of the extra-light colored bees, and I like them. My queens
are prolific, their colonies are just as populous as any of my dark
ones--they are rustlers to work. If honey is left exposed, they will
find it first, and get the lion’s share, too. I think they are just a
little inclined to steal from the blacks. They are very easy to handle,
stick right to the combs, and protect them from robbers. If they prove
to be hardy to winter, I will requeen all my colonies in the spring.

  C. P. MCKINNON.

Bangor, Iowa, Nov. 30, 1893.


A Beginner 65 Years Old.

I am 65 years old, though a young bee-keeper, and have never happened
to be where many bees were kept. I have had a great deal of bad luck
the last two or three years. I had my safe blown open, and robbed of
nearly $2,000 of the town’s money, which used me up financially. But I
believe my little busy bees are going to help me out soon.

I traded my watch, last winter, for 3 colonies of bees, and I think
they have done well this season. After cleaning the sections and
sorting the partly-filled ones, I had 330 sections of honey, 7 new
colonies of bees, making me 10 to put into winter quarters on Nov.
25th, with plenty of honey to winter, with the exception of one small
colony that I fed for a week; it had not very many bees, but it may
come out all right in the spring.

I think the above is doing pretty well for a greenhorn; and I also
think I should have made a grand failure of bee-keeping if I had not
subscribed for the AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL. I traded for the bees last
winter--about a year ago--and subscribed for the BEE JOURNAL, and
became a little posted by spring. It paid me ten times the amount of
the subscription price. I wish we had another Mrs. Jennie Atchley here
in the northwest.

  DANIEL SMETHURST.

Seneca, Wis., Dec. 4, 1893.


=Read= our great offers on page 62.




Honey & Beeswax Market Quotations.


Rules for Grading.

The following rules for grading honey were adopted by the North
American Bee-Keepers’ Association, in Washington, and, so far as
possible, quotations are made according to these rules:

FANCY.--All sections to be well filled; combs straight, of even
thickness, and firmly attached to all four sides; both wood and comb
unsoiled by travel-stain, or otherwise; all the cells sealed except the
row of cells next the wood.

NO. 1.--All sections well filled, but combs uneven or crooked, detached
at the bottom, or with but few cells unsealed; both wood and comb
unsoiled by travel-stain or otherwise.

In addition to this the honey is to be classified according to color,
using the terms white, amber and dark. That is, there will be “fancy
white,” “No. 1 dark,” etc.


CHICAGO, ILL., Dec. 4, 1893.--There were but few shipments of honey to
this market last week. The cold weather started business up, and honey
moved some better than heretofore. Fancy and No. 1 is getting scarce,
and prices are on the upward tendency. Fancy, 16c.; No. 1 white, 15c.;
fair, 14c. Extracted is moving slowly with plenty to satisfy demand.
Beeswax, 20@22c.

  J. A. L.


ALBANY, N. Y., Dec. 22.--Honey market is very quiet and dull. All
prices are nominal and demand very light. We look for a better demand
after the Holidays, but the past month has been the slowest honey trade
we ever saw in this market.

  H. R. W.


CINCINNATI, O., Dec. 19.--There is a good demand for honey in the small
way, while demand from manufacturers is still slow. Extracted honey
brings 5@8c. Comb honey, 12@16c. in a jobbing way for fair to best
white.

Beeswax is in fair demand at 20@23c. for good to choice yellow.

  C. F. M. & S.


NEW YORK. N. Y., Dec. 22.--Our market for comb honey is unusually
dull and shows no activity whatever. The supply has been large, while
the demand has been very light, hence the stocks have accumulated. We
quote: Fancy white, 1-lb., 12@13c.; off grades, 11c.; buckwheat, 10c.
It is necessary to shade even these prices to effect calls for round
lots. Extracted is in fair demand with plenty of supply of all grades.
We quote: White clover and basswood, 6c.; California, 5½@6c.; Southern,
55@60c. per gal.; buckwheat, no demand.

Beeswax, is in very good demand at 25@26c. for good average quality.

  H. B. & S.


CHICAGO, ILL., Nov. 23.--The Chicago market has plenty of honey, and
14c. seems to be the outside price obtainable. Anything that will not
grade strictly No. 1 must be sold at 12@13c. Large quantities have been
sold, but the supply is at present in excess of the demand. Extracted
finds ready sale at 6@6½c. for Northern honey; Southern, in barrels,
5c. Beeswax, 22@24c.

  S. T. F. & Co.


KANSAS CITY, MO., Dec. 21.--The demand for comb and extracted honey is
not as good as we would like to see it. We quote: No. 1 white 1-lb.
comb, 14@15c.; No. 2 white, 13@14c.; No. 1 amber, 13@13½c.; No. 2 amber
10@12c. Extracted, white, 6@7c.; amber, 5@5½c.

  C.-M. C. Co.


[Transcriber’s Note:

Obvious printer errors corrected silently.

Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation are as in the original.]







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL, VOLUME XXXIII, NO. 2, JANUARY 11, 1894 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.