GREAT STORIES OF A GREAT DETECTIVE


  The Adventures of

  DR. THORNDYKE

  (The Singing Bone)



  By R. AUSTIN FREEMAN



  POPULAR LIBRARY • NEW YORK




  POPULAR LIBRARY EDITION



  COMPLETE AND

  UNABRIDGED



  Originally published under the title of

  THE SINGING BONE



  COPYRIGHT MCMXXIII

  By DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY, INC.

  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

  By arrangement with Dodd, Mead and Company, Inc.




PREFACE


The peculiar construction of the first four stories in the present
collection will probably strike both reader and critic and seem to
call for some explanation, which I accordingly proceed to supply.

In the conventional “detective story” the interest is made to focus
on the question, “Who did it?” The identity of the criminal is a
secret that is jealously guarded up to the very end of the book, and
its disclosure forms the final climax.

This I have always regarded as somewhat of a mistake. In real life,
the identity of the criminal is a question of supreme importance for
practical reasons; but in fiction, where no such reasons exist, I
conceive the interest of the reader to be engaged chiefly by the
demonstration of unexpected consequences of simple actions, of
unsuspected causal connections, and by the evolution of an ordered
train of evidence from a mass of facts apparently incoherent and
unrelated. The reader’s curiosity is concerned not so much with the
question “Who did it?” as with the question “How was the discovery
achieved?” That is to say, the ingenious reader is interested more in
the intermediate action than in the ultimate result.

The offer by a popular author of a prize to the reader who should
identify the criminal in a certain “detective story,” exhibiting as
it did the opposite view, suggested to me an interesting question.

Would it be possible to write a detective story in which from the
outset the reader was taken entirely into the author’s confidence,
was made an actual witness of the crime and furnished with every fact
that could possibly be used in its detection? Would there be any
story left when the reader had all the facts? I believed that there
would; and as an experiment to test the justice of my belief, I wrote
“The Case of Oscar Brodski.” Here the usual conditions are reversed;
the reader knows everything, the detective knows nothing, and the
interest focuses on the unexpected significance of trivial
circumstances.

By excellent judges on both sides of the Atlantic--including the
editor of _Pearson’s Magazine_--this story was so far approved of
that I was invited to produce others of the same type.

Three more were written and are here included together with one of
the more orthodox character, so that the reader can judge of the
respective merits of the two methods of narration.

Nautical readers will observe that I have taken the liberty (for
obvious reasons connected with the law of libel) of planting a
screw-pile lighthouse on the Girdler Sand in place of the
light-vessel. I mention the matter to forestall criticism and save
readers the trouble of writing to point out the error.

                                                    R. A. F.

Gravesend




CONTENTS


  I   THE CASE OF OSCAR BRODSKI

        I   The Mechanism of Crime

       II   The Mechanism of Detection


  II   A CASE OF PREMEDITATION

        I   The Elimination of Mr. Pratt

       II   Rival Sleuth-Hounds


  III   THE ECHO OF A MUTINY

        I   Death on the Girdler

       II   “The Singing Bone”


  IV   A WASTREL’S ROMANCE

        I   The Spinsters’ Guest

       II   Munera Pulveris


  V   THE OLD LAG

        I   The Changed Immutable

       II   The Ship of the Desert




THE CASE OF OSCAR BRODSKI


PART I

THE MECHANISM OF CRIME

A surprising amount of nonsense has been talked about conscience. On
the one hand remorse (or the “again-bite,” as certain scholars of
ultra-Teutonic leanings would prefer to call it); on the other hand
“an easy conscience”: these have been accepted as the determining
factors of happiness or the reverse.

Of course there is an element of truth in the “easy conscience” view,
but it begs the whole question. A particularly hardy conscience may
be quite easy under the most unfavourable conditions--conditions in
which the more feeble conscience might be severely afflicted with the
“again-bite.” And, then, it seems to be the fact that some fortunate
persons have no conscience at all; a negative gift that raises them
above the mental vicissitudes of the common herd of humanity.

Now, Silas Hickler was a case in point. No one, looking into his
cheerful, round face, beaming with benevolence and wreathed in
perpetual smiles, would have imagined him to be a criminal. Least of
all, his worthy, high-church house keeper, who was a witness to his
unvarying amiability, who constantly heard him carolling
light-heartedly about the house and noted his appreciative zest at
meal-times.

Yet it is a fact that Silas earned his modest, though comfortable,
income by the gentle art of burglary. A precarious trade and risky
withal, yet not so very hazardous if pursued with judgment and
moderation. And Silas was eminently a man of judgment. He worked
invariably alone. He kept his own counsel. No confederate had he to
turn King’s Evidence at a pinch; no one he knew would bounce off in a
fit of temper to Scotland Yard. Nor was he greedy and thriftless, as
most criminals are. His “scoops” were few and far between, carefully
planned, secretly executed, and the proceeds judiciously invested in
“weekly property.”

In early life Silas had been connected with the diamond industry, and
he still did a little rather irregular dealing. In the trade he was
suspected of transactions with I.D.B.’s, and one or two indiscreet
dealers had gone so far as to whisper the ominous word “fence.” But
Silas Smiled a benevolent smile and went his way. He knew what he
knew, and his clients in Amsterdam were not inquisitive.

Such was Silas Hickler. As he strolled round his garden in the dusk
of an October evening, he seemed the very type of modest,
middle-class prosperity. He was dressed in the travelling suit that
he wore on his little continental trips; his bag was packed and stood
in readiness on the sitting room sofa. A parcel of diamonds
(purchased honestly, though without impertinent questions, at
Southampton) was in the inside pocket of his waistcoat, and another
more valuable parcel was stowed in a cavity in the heel of his right
boot. In an hour and a half it would be time for him to set out to
catch the boat train at the junction; meanwhile there was nothing to
do but to stroll round the fading garden and consider how he should
invest the proceeds of the impending deal. His housekeeper had gone
over to Welham for the week’s shopping, and would probably not be
back until eleven o’clock. He was alone in the premises and just a
trifle dull.

He was about to turn into the house when his ear caught the sound of
footsteps on the unmade road that passed the end of the garden. He
paused and listened. There was no other dwelling near, and the road
led nowhere, fading away into the waste land beyond the house. Could
this be a visitor? It seemed unlikely, for visitors were few at Silas
Hickler’s house. Meanwhile the footsteps continued to approach,
ringing out with increasing loudness on the hard, stony path.

Silas strolled down to the gate, and, leaning on it, looked out with
some curiosity. Presently a glow of light showed him the face of a
man, apparently lighting his pipe; then a dim figure detached itself
from the enveloping gloom, advanced towards him and halted opposite
the garden. The stranger removed a cigarette from his mouth and,
blowing out a cloud of smoke, asked--

“Can you tell me if this road will take me to Badsham Junction?”

“No,” replied Hickler, “but there is a footpath farther on that leads
to the station.”

“Footpath!” growled the stranger. “I’ve had enough of footpaths. I
came down from town to Catley intending to walk across to the
junction. I started along the road, and then some fool directed me to
a short cut, with the result that I have been blundering about in the
dark for the last half-hour. My sight isn’t very good, you know,” he
added.

“What train do you want to catch?” asked Hickler.

“Seven fifty-eight,” was the reply.

“I am going to catch that train myself,” said Silas, “but I shan’t be
starting for another hour. The station is only three-quarters of a
mile from here. If you like to come in and take a rest, we can walk
down together and then you’ll be sure of not missing your way.”

“It’s very good of you,” said the stranger, peering, with spectacled
eyes, at the dark house, “but--I think----”

“Might as well wait here as at the station,” said Silas in his genial
way, holding the gate open, and the stranger, after a momentary
hesitation, entered and, flinging away his cigarette, followed him to
the door of the cottage.

The sitting-room was in darkness, save for the dull glow of the
expiring fire, but, entering before his guest, Silas applied a match
to the lamp that hung from the ceiling. As the flame leaped up,
flooding the little interior with light, the two men regarded one
another with mutual curiosity.

“Brodski, by Jingo!” was Hickler’s silent commentary, as he looked at
his guest. “Doesn’t know me, evidently--wouldn’t, of course, after
all these years and with his bad eyesight. Take a seat, sir,” he
added aloud. “Will you join me in a little refreshment to while away
the time?”

Brodski murmured an indistinct acceptance, and, as his host turned to
open a cupboard, he deposited his hat (a hard, grey felt) on a chair
in a corner, placed his bag on the edge of the table, resting his
umbrella against it, and sat down in a small arm-chair.

“Have a biscuit?” said Hickler, as he placed a whisky-bottle on the
table together with a couple of his best star-pattern tumblers and a
siphon.

“Thanks, I think I will,” said Brodski. “The railway journey and all
this confounded tramping about, you know----”

“Yes,” agreed Silas. “Doesn’t do to start with an empty stomach. Hope
you don’t mind oat-cakes; I see they’re the only biscuits I have.”

Brodski hastened to assure him that oat-cakes were his special and
peculiar fancy; and in confirmation, having mixed himself a stiff
jorum, he fell to upon the biscuits with evident gusto.

Brodski was a deliberate feeder, and at present appeared to be
somewhat sharp set. His measured munching being unfavourable to
conversation, most of the talking fell to Silas; and, for once, that
genial transgressor found the task embarrassing. The natural thing
would have been to discuss his guest’s destination and perhaps the
object of his journey; but this was precisely what Hickler avoided
doing. For he knew both, and instinct told him to keep his knowledge
to himself.

Brodski was a diamond merchant of considerable reputation, and in a
large way of business. He bought stones principally in the rough, and
of these he was a most excellent judge. His fancy was for stones of
somewhat unusual size and value, and it was well known to be his
custom, when he had accumulated a sufficient stock, to carry them
himself to Amsterdam and supervise the cutting of the rough stones.
Of this Hickler was aware, and he had no doubt that Brodski was now
starting on one of his periodical excursions; that somewhere in the
recesses of his rather shabby clothing was concealed a paper packet
possibly worth several thousand pounds.

Brodski sat by the table munching monotonously and talking little.
Hickler sat opposite him, talking nervously and rather wildly at
times, and watching his guest with a growing fascination. Precious
stones, and especially diamonds, were Hickler’s specialty. “Hard
stuff”--silver plate--he avoided entirely; gold, excepting in the
form of specie, he seldom touched; but stones, of which he could
carry off a whole consignment in the heel of his boot and dispose of
with absolute safety, formed the staple of his industry. And here was
a man sitting opposite him with a parcel in his pocket containing the
equivalent of a dozen of his most successful “scoops”; stones worth
perhaps---- Here he pulled himself up short and began to talk
rapidly, though without much coherence. For, even as he talked, other
words, formed subconsciously, seemed to insinuate themselves into the
interstices of the sentences, and to carry on a parallel train of
thought.

“Gets chilly in the evenings now, doesn’t it?” said Hickler.

“It does indeed,” Brodski agreed, and then resumed his slow munching,
breathing audibly through his nose.

“Five thousand at least,” the subconscious train of thought resumed;
“probably six or seven, perhaps ten.” Silas fidgeted in his chair and
endeavoured to concentrate his ideas on some topic of interest. He
was growing disagreeably conscious of a new and unfamiliar state of
mind.

“Do you take any interest in gardening?” he asked. Next to diamonds
and weekly “property,” his besetting weakness was fuchsias.

Brodski chuckled sourly. “Hatton Garden is the nearest approach----”
He broke off suddenly, and then added, “I am a Londoner, you know.”

The abrupt break in the sentence was not unnoticed by Silas, nor had
he any difficulty in interpreting it. A man who carries untold wealth
upon his person must needs be wary in his speech.

“Yes,” he answered absently, “it’s hardly a Londoner’s hobby.” And
then, half consciously, he began a rapid calculation. Put it at five
thousand pounds. What would that represent in weekly property? His
last set of houses had cost two hundred and fifty pounds apiece, and
he had let them at ten shillings and sixpence a week. At that rate,
five thousand pounds represented twenty houses at ten and sixpence a
week--say ten pounds a week--one pound eight shillings a day--five
hundred and twenty pounds a year--for life. It was a competency.
Added to what he already had, it was wealth. With that income he
could fling the tools of his trade into the river and live out the
remainder of his life in comfort and security.

He glanced furtively at his guest across the table, and then looked
away quickly as he felt stirring within him an impulse the nature of
which he could not mistake. This must be put an end to. Crimes
against the person he had always looked upon as sheer insanity. There
was, it is true, that little affair of the Weybridge policeman, but
that was unforeseen and unavoidable, and it was the constable’s doing
after all. And there was the old housekeeper at Epsom, too, but, of
course, if the old idiot would shriek in that insane fashion--well,
it was an accident, very regrettable, to be sure, and no one could be
more sorry for the mishap than himself. But deliberate
homicide!--robbery from the person! It was the act of a stark lunatic.

Of course, if he had happened to be that sort of person, here was the
opportunity of a lifetime. The immense booty, the empty house, the
solitary neighbourhood, away from the main road and from other
habitations; the time, the darkness--but, of course, there was the
body to be thought of; that was always the difficulty. What to do
with the body---- Here he caught the shriek of the up express,
rounding the curve in the line that ran past the waste land at the
back of the house. The sound started a new train of thought, and, as
he followed it out, his eyes fixed themselves on the unconscious and
taciturn Brodski, as he sat thoughtfully sipping his whisky. At
length, averting his gaze with an effort, he rose suddenly from his
chair and turned to look at the clock on the mantelpiece, spreading
out his hands before the dying fire. A tumult of strange sensations
warned him to leave the house. He shivered slightly, though he was
rather hot than chilly, and, turning his head, looked at the door.

“Seems to be a confounded draught,” he said, with another slight
shiver; “did I shut the door properly, I wonder?” He strode across
the room and, opening the door wide, looked out into the dark garden.
A desire, sudden and urgent, had come over him to get out into the
open air, to be on the road and have done with this madness that was
knocking at the door of his brain.

“I wonder if it is worth while to start yet,” he said, with a
yearning glance at the murky, starless sky.

Brodski roused himself and looked round. “Is your clock right?” he
asked.

Silas reluctantly admitted that it was.

“How long will it take us to walk to the station?” inquired Brodski.

“Oh, about twenty-five minutes to half-an-hour,” replied Silas,
unconsciously exaggerating the distance.

“Well,” said Brodski, “we’ve got more than an hour yet, and it’s more
comfortable here than hanging about the station. I don’t see the use
of starting before we need.”

“No; of course not,” Silas agreed. A wave of strange emotion,
half-regretful, half-triumphant, surged through his brain. For some
moments he remained standing on the threshold, looking out dreamily
into the night. Then he softly closed the door; and, seemingly
without the exercise of his volition, the key turned noiselessly in
the lock.

He returned to his chair and tried to open a conversation with the
taciturn Brodski, but the words came faltering and disjointed. He
felt his face growing hot, his brain full and intense, and there was
a faint, high-pitched singing in his ears. He was conscious of
watching his guest with a new and fearful interest, and, by sheer
force of will, turned away his eyes; only to find them a moment later
involuntarily returning to fix the unconscious man with yet more
horrible intensity. And ever through his mind walked, like a dreadful
procession, the thoughts of what that other man--the man of blood and
violence--would do in these circumstances. Detail by detail the
hideous synthesis fitted together the parts of the imagined crime,
and arranged them in due sequence until they formed a succession of
events, rational, connected and coherent.

He rose uneasily from his chair, with his eyes still riveted upon his
guest. He could not sit any longer opposite that man with his hidden
store of precious gems. The impulse that he recognized with fear and
wonder was growing more ungovernable from moment to moment. If he
stayed it would presently overpower him, and then---- He shrank with
horror from the dreadful thought, but his fingers itched to handle
the diamonds. For Silas was, after all, a criminal by nature and
habit. He was a beast of prey. His livelihood had never been earned;
it had been taken by stealth or, if necessary, by force. His
instincts were predacious, and the proximity of unguarded valuables
suggested to him, as a logical consequence, their abstraction or
seizure. His unwillingness to let these diamonds go away beyond his
reach was fast becoming overwhelming.

But he would make one more effort to escape. He would keep out of
Brodski’s actual presence until the moment for starting came.

“If you’ll excuse me,” he said, “I will go and put on a thicker pair
of boots. After all this dry weather we may get a change, and damp
feet are very uncomfortable when you are travelling.”

“Yes; dangerous too,” agreed Brodski.

Silas walked through into the adjoining kitchen, where, by the light
of the little lamp that was burning there, he had seen his stout,
country boots placed, cleaned and in readiness, and sat down upon a
chair to make the change. He did not, of course, intend to wear the
country boots, for the diamonds were concealed in those he had on.
But he would make the change and then alter his mind; it would all
help to pass the time. He took a deep breath. It was a relief, at any
rate, to be out of that room. Perhaps if he stayed away, the
temptation would pass. Brodski would go on his way--he wished that he
was going alone--and the danger would be over--at least--and the
opportunity would have gone--the diamonds----

He looked up as he slowly unlaced his boot. From where he sat he
could see Brodski sitting by the table with his back towards the
kitchen door. He had finished eating, now, and was composedly rolling
a cigarette. Silas breathed heavily, and, slipping off his boot, sat
for a while motionless, gazing steadily at the other man’s back. Then
he unlaced the other boot, still staring abstractedly at his
unconscious guest, drew it off, and laid it very quietly on the floor.

Brodski calmly finished rolling his cigarette, licked the paper, put
away his pouch, and, having dusted the crumbs of tobacco from his
knees, began to search his pockets for a match. Suddenly, yielding to
an uncontrollable impulse, Silas stood up and began stealthily to
creep along the passage to the sitting-room. Not a sound came from
his stockinged feet. Silently as a cat he stole forward, breathing
softly with parted lips, until he stood at the threshold of the room.
His face flushed duskily, his eyes, wide and staring, glittered in
the lamplight, and the racing blood hummed in his ears.

Brodski struck a match--Silas noted that it was a wooden
vesta--lighted his cigarette, blew out the match and flung it into
the fender. Then he replaced the box in his pocket and commenced to
smoke.

Slowly and without a sound Silas crept forward into the room, step by
step, with catlike stealthiness, until he stood close behind
Brodski’s chair--so close that he had to turn his head that his
breath might not stir the hair upon the other man’s head. So, for
half-a-minute, he stood motionless, like a symbolical statue of
Murder, glaring down with horrible, glittering eyes upon the
unconscious diamond merchant, while his quick breath passed without a
sound through his open mouth and his fingers writhed slowly like the
tentacles of a giant hydra. And then, as noiselessly as ever, he
backed away to the door, turned quickly and walked back into the
kitchen.

He drew a deep breath. It had been a near thing. Brodski’s life had
hung upon a thread. For it had been so easy. Indeed, if he had
happened, as he stood behind the man’s chair, to have a weapon--a
hammer, for instance, or even a stone----

He glanced round the kitchen and his eyes lighted on a bar that had
been left by the workmen who had put up the new greenhouse. It was an
odd piece cut off from a square, wrought-iron stanchion, and was
about a foot long and perhaps three-quarters of an inch thick. Now,
if he had had that in his hand a minute ago----

He picked the bar up, balanced it in his hand and swung it round his
head. A formidable weapon this: silent, too. And it fitted the plan
that had passed through his brain. Bah! He had better put the thing
down.

But he did not. He stepped over to the door and looked again at
Brodski, sitting, as before, meditatively smoking, with his back
towards the kitchen.

Suddenly a change came over Silas. His face flushed, the veins of his
neck stood out and a sullen scowl settled on his face. He drew out
his watch, glanced at it earnestly and replaced it. Then he strode
swiftly but silently along the passage into the sitting-room.

A pace away from his victim’s chair he halted and took deliberate
aim. The bar swung aloft, but not without some faint rustle of
movement, for Brodski looked round quickly even as the iron whistled
through the air. The movement disturbed the murderer’s aim, and the
bar glanced off his victim’s head, making only a trifling wound.
Brodski sprang up with a tremulous, bleating cry, and clutched his
assailant’s arms with the tenacity of mortal terror.

Then began a terrible struggle, as the two men, locked in a deadly
embrace, swayed to and fro and trampled backwards and forwards. The
chair was overturned, an empty glass swept from the table and, with
Brodski’s spectacles, crushed beneath stamping feet. And thrice that
dreadful, pitiful, bleating cry rang out into the night, filling
Silas, despite his murderous frenzy, with terror lest some chance
wayfarer should hear it. Gathering his great strength for a final
effort, he forced his victim backwards onto the table and, snatching
up a corner of the tablecloth, thrust it into his face and crammed it
into his mouth as it opened to utter another shriek. And thus they
remained for a full two minutes, almost motionless, like some
dreadful group of tragic allegory. Then, when the last faint
twitchings had died away, Silas relaxed his grasp and let the limp
body slip softly onto the floor.

It was over. For good or for evil, the thing was done. Silas stood
up, breathing heavily, and, as he wiped the sweat from his face, he
looked at the clock. The hands stood at one minute to seven. The
whole thing had taken a little over three minutes. He had nearly an
hour in which to finish his task. The goods train that entered into
his scheme came by at twenty minutes past, and it was only three
hundred yards to the line. Still, he must not waste time. He was now
quite composed, and only disturbed by the thought that Brodski’s
cries might have been heard. If no one had heard them it was all
plain sailing.

He stooped, and, gently disengaging the tablecloth from the dead
man’s teeth, began a careful search of his pockets. He was not long
finding what he sought, and, as he pinched the paper packet and felt
the little hard bodies grating on one another inside, his faint
regrets for what had happened were swallowed up in
self-congratulations.

He now set about his task with business-like briskness and an
attentive eye on the clock. A few large drops of blood had fallen on
the tablecloth, and there was a small bloody smear on the carpet by
the dead man’s head. Silas fetched from the kitchen some water, a
nail-brush and a dry cloth, and, having washed out the stains from
the table-cover--not forgetting the deal table-top underneath--and
cleaned away the smear from the carpet and rubbed the damp places
dry, he slipped a sheet of paper under the head of the corpse to
prevent further contamination. Then he set the table cloth straight,
stood the chair upright, laid the broken spectacles on the table and
picked up the cigarette, which had been trodden flat in the struggle,
and flung it under the grate. Then there was the broken glass, which
he swept up into a dust-pan. Part of it was the remains of the
shattered tumbler, and the rest the fragments of the broken
spectacles. He turned it out onto a sheet of paper and looked it over
carefully, picking out the larger recognizable pieces of the
spectacle-glasses and putting them aside on a separate slip of paper,
together with a sprinkling of the minute fragments. The remainder he
shot back into the dust-pan and, having hurriedly put on his boots,
carried it out to the rubbish-heap at the back of the house.

It was now time to start. Hastily cutting off a length of string from
his string-box--for Silas was an orderly man and despised the
oddments of string with which many people make shift--he tied it to
the dead man’s bag and umbrella and slung them from his shoulder.
Then he folded up the paper of broken glass, and, slipping it and the
spectacles into his pocket, picked up the body and threw it over his
shoulder. Brodski was a small, spare man, weighing not more than nine
stone; not a very formidable burden for a big, athletic man like
Silas.

The night was intensely dark, and, when Silas looked out of the back
gate over the waste land that stretched from his house to the
railway, he could hardly see twenty yards ahead. After listening
cautiously and hearing no sound, he went out, shut the gate softly
behind him and set forth at a good pace, though carefully, over the
broken ground. His progress was not as silent as he could have wished
for, though the scanty turf that covered the gravelly land was thick
enough to deaden his footfalls, the swinging bag and umbrella made an
irritating noise; indeed, his movements were more hampered by them
than by the weightier burden.

The distance to the line was about three hundred yards. Ordinarily he
would have walked it in from three to four minutes, but now, going
cautiously with his burden and stopping now and again to listen, it
took him just six minutes to reach the three-bar fence that separated
the waste land from the railway. Arrived here he halted for a moment
and once more listened attentively, peering into the darkness on all
sides. Not a living creature was to be seen or heard in this desolate
spot, but far away, the shriek of an engine’s whistle warned him to
hasten.

Lifting the corpse easily over the fence, he carried it a few yards
farther to a point where the line curved sharply. Here he laid it
face downwards, with the neck over the near rail. Drawing out his
pocket-knife, he cut through the knot that fastened the umbrella to
the string and also secured the bag; and when he had flung the bag
and umbrella on the track beside the body, he carefully pocketed the
string, excepting the little loop that had fallen to the ground when
the knot was cut.

The quick snort and clanking rumble of an approaching goods train
began now to be clearly audible. Rapidly, Silas drew from his pockets
the battered spectacles and the packet of broken glass. The former he
threw down by the dead man’s head, and then, emptying the packet into
his hand, sprinkled the fragments of glass around the spectacles.

He was none too soon. Already the quick, laboured puffing of the
engine sounded close at hand. His impulse was to stay and watch; to
witness the final catastrophe that should convert the murder into an
accident or suicide. But it was hardly safe: it would be better that
he should not be near lest he should not be able to get away without
being seen. Hastily he climbed back over the fence and strode away
across the rough fields, while the train came snorting and clattering
towards the curve.

He had nearly reached his back gate when a sound from the line
brought him to a sudden halt; it was a prolonged whistle accompanied
by the groan of brakes and the loud clank of colliding trucks. The
snorting of the engine had ceased and was replaced by the penetrating
hiss of escaping steam.

The train had stopped!

For one brief moment Silas stood with bated breath and mouth agape
like one petrified; then he strode forward quickly to the gate, and,
letting himself in, silently slid the bolt. He was undeniably
alarmed. What could have happened on the line? It was practically
certain that the body had been seen; but what was happening now? and
would they come to the house? He entered the kitchen, and having
paused again to listen--for somebody might come and knock at the door
at any moment--he walked through the sitting-room and looked round.
All seemed in order there. There was the bar, though, lying where he
had dropped it in the scuffle. He picked it up and held it under the
lamp. There was no blood on it; only one or two hairs. Somewhat
absently he wiped it with the table-cover, and then, running out
through the kitchen into the back garden, dropped it over the wall
into a bed of nettles. Not that there was any thing incriminating in
the bar, but, since he had used it as a weapon, it had somehow
acquired a sinister aspect to his eye.

He now felt that it would be well to start for the station at once.
It was not time yet, for it was barely twenty-five minutes past
seven; but he did not wish to be found in the house if any one should
come. His soft hat was on the sofa with his bag, to which his
umbrella was strapped. He put on the hat, caught up the bag and
stepped over to the door; then he came back to turn down the lamp.
And it was at this moment, when he stood with his hand raised to the
burner, that his eyes, travelling by chance into the dim corner of
the room, lighted on Brodski’s grey felt hat, reposing on the chair
where the dead man had placed it when he entered the house.

Silas stood for a few moments as if petrified, with the chilly sweat
of mortal fear standing in beads upon his forehead. Another instant
and he would have turned the lamp down and gone on his way; and then
he strode over to the chair, snatched up the hat and looked inside
it. Yes, there was the name, “Oscar Brodski,” written plainly on the
lining. If he had gone away, leaving it to be discovered, he would
have been lost; indeed, even now, if a search-party should come to
the house, it was enough to send him to the gallows.

His limbs shook with horror at the thought, but in spite of his panic
he did not lose his self-possession. Darting through into the
kitchen, he grabbed up a handful of the dry brush-wood that was kept
for lighting fires and carried it to the sitting-room grate where he
thrust it on the extinct, but still hot, embers, and crumpling up the
paper that he had placed under Brodski’s head--on which paper he now
noticed, for the first time, a minute bloody smear--he poked it in
under the wood, and striking a wax match, set light to it. As the
wood flared up, he hacked at the hat with his pocket knife and threw
the ragged strips into the blaze.

And all the while his heart was thumping and his hands a-tremble with
the dread of discovery. The fragments of felt were far from
inflammable, tending rather to fuse into cindery masses that smoked
and smouldered than to burn away into actual ash. Moreover, to his
dismay, they emitted a powerful resinous stench mixed with the odour
of burning hair, so that he had to open the kitchen window (since he
dared not unlock the front door) to disperse the reek. And still, as
he fed the fire with small cut fragments, he strained his ears to
catch, above the crackling of the wood, the sound of the dreaded
footsteps, the knock on the door that should be as the summons of
Fate.

The time, too, was speeding on. Twenty-one minutes to eight! In a few
minutes more he must set out or he would miss the train. He dropped
the dismembered hat-brim on the blazing wood and ran upstairs to open
a window, since he must close that in the kitchen before he left.
When he came back, the brim had already curled up into a black,
clinkery mass that bubbled and hissed as the fat, pungent smoke rose
from it sluggishly to the chimney.

Nineteen minutes to eight! It was time to start. He took up the poker
and carefully beat the cinders into small particles, stirring them
into the glowing embers of the wood and coal. There was nothing
unusual in the appearance of the grate. It was his constant custom to
burn letters and other discarded articles in the sitting room fire:
his housekeeper would notice nothing out of the common. Indeed, the
cinders would probably be reduced to ashes before she returned. He
had been careful to notice that there were no metallic fittings of
any kind in the hat, which might have escaped burning.

Once more he picked up his bag, took a last look round, turned down
the lamp and, unlocking the door, held it open for a few moments.
Then he went out, locked the door, pocketed the key (of which his
housekeeper had a duplicate) and set off at a brisk pace for the
station.

He arrived in good time after all, and, having taken his ticket,
strolled through onto the platform. The train was not yet signalled,
but there seemed to be an unusual stir in the place. The passengers
were collected in a group at one end of the platform, and were all
looking in one direction down the line; and, even as he walked
towards them, with a certain tremulous, nauseating curiosity, two men
emerged from the darkness and ascended the slope to the platform,
carrying a stretcher covered with a tarpaulin. The passengers parted
to let the bearers pass, turning fascinated eyes upon the shape that
showed faintly through the rough pall; and, when the stretcher had
been borne into the lamp-room, they fixed their attention upon a
porter who followed carrying a handbag and an umbrella.

Suddenly one of the passengers started forward with an exclamation.

“Is that his umbrella?” he demanded.

“Yes, sir,” answered the porter, stopping and holding it out for the
speaker’s inspection.

“My God!” ejaculated the passenger; then, turning sharply to a tall
man who stood close by, he said excitedly: “That’s Brodski’s
umbrella. I could swear to it. You remember Brodski?” The tall man
nodded, and the passenger, turning once more to the porter, said: “I
identify that umbrella. It belongs to a gentleman named Brodski. If
you look in his hat you will see his name written in it. He always
writes his name in his hat.”

“We haven’t found his hat yet,” said the porter; “but here is the
station-master coming up the line.” He awaited the arrival of his
superior and then announced: “This gentleman, sir, has identified the
umbrella.”

“Oh,” said the station-master, “you recognize the umbrella, sir, do
you? Then perhaps you would step into the lamp-room and see if you
can identify the body.”

“Is it--is he--very much injured?” the passenger asked tremulously.

“Well, yes,” was the reply. “You see, the engine and six of the
trucks went over him before they could stop the train. Took his head
clean off, in fact.”

“Shocking! shocking!” gasped the passenger. “I think, if you don’t
mind--I’d--I’d rather not. You don’t think it’s necessary, doctor, do
you?”

“Yes, I do,” replied the tall man. “Early identification may be of
the first importance.”

“Then I suppose I must,” said the passenger.

Very reluctantly he allowed himself to be conducted by the
station-master to the lamp-room, as the clang of the bell announced
the approaching train. Silas Hickler followed and took his stand with
the expectant crowd outside the closed door. In a few moments the
passenger burst out, pale and awe-stricken, and rushed up to his tall
friend. “It is!” he exclaimed breathlessly. “It’s Brodski! Poor old
Brodski! Horrible! horrible! He was to have met me here and come on
with me to Amsterdam.”

“Had he any--merchandize about him?” the tall man asked; and Silas
strained his ears to catch the reply.

“He had some stones, no doubt, but I don’t know what. His clerk will
know, of course. By the way, doctor, could you watch the case for me?
Just to be sure it was really an accident or--you know what. We were
old friends, you know, fellow townsmen, too; we were both born in
Warsaw. I’d like you to give an eye to the case.”

“Very well,” said the other. “I will satisfy myself that--there is
nothing more than appears, and let you have a report. Will that do?”

“Thank you. It’s excessively good of you, doctor. Ah! here comes the
train. I hope it won’t inconvenience you to stay and see to this
matter.”

“Not in the least,” replied the doctor. “We are not due at Warmington
until tomorrow afternoon, and I expect we can find out all that is
necessary to know before that.”

Silas looked long and curiously at the tall, imposing man who was, as
it were, taking his seat at the chess board, to play against him for
his life. A formidable antagonist he looked, with his keen,
thoughtful face, so resolute and calm. As Silas stepped into his
carriage he thought with deep discomfort of Brodski’s hat, and hoped
that he had made no other oversight.


PART II

THE MECHANISM OF DETECTION

(_Related by Christopher Jervis, M.D._)

The singular circumstances that attended the death of Mr. Oscar
Brodski, the well-known diamond merchant of Hatton Garden,
illustrated very forcibly the importance of one or two points in
medico-legal practice which Thorndyke was accustomed to insist were
not sufficiently appreciated. What those points were, I shall leave
my friend and teacher to state at the proper place; and meanwhile, as
the case is in the highest degree instructive, I shall record the
incidents in the order of their occurrence.

The dusk of an October evening was closing in as Thorndyke and I, the
sole occupants of a smoking compartment, found ourselves approaching
the little station of Ludham; and, as the train slowed down, we
peered out at the knot of country people who were waiting on the
platform. Suddenly Thorndyke exclaimed in a tone of surprise: “Why,
that is surely Boscovitch!” and almost at the same moment a brisk,
excitable little man darted at the door of our compartment and
literally tumbled in.

“I hope I don’t intrude on this learned conclave,” he said, shaking
hands genially and banging his Gladstone with impulsive violence into
the rack; “but I saw your faces at the window, and naturally jumped
at the chance of such pleasant companionship.”

“You are very flattering,” said Thorndyke; “so flattering that you
leave us nothing to say. But what in the name of fortune are you
doing at--what’s the name of the place--Ludham?”

“My brother has a little place a mile or so from here, and I have
been spending a couple of days with him,” Mr. Boscovitch explained.
“I shall change at Badsham Junction and catch the boat train for
Amsterdam. But whither are you two bound? I see you have your
mysterious little green box up on the hat-rack, so I infer that you
are on some romantic quest, eh? Going to unravel some dark and
intricate crime?”

“No,” replied Thorndyke. “We are bound for Warmington on a quite
prosaic errand. I am instructed to watch the proceedings at an
inquest there to-morrow on behalf of the Griffin Life Insurance
Office, and we are travelling down to-night as it is rather a
cross-country journey.”

“But why the box of magic?” asked Boscovitch, glancing up at the
hat-rack.

“I never go away from home without it,” answered Thorndyke. “One
never knows what may turn up; the trouble of carrying it is small
when set off against the comfort of having appliances at hand in an
emergency.”

Boscovitch continued to stare up at the little square case covered
with Willesden canvas. Presently he remarked: “I often used to wonder
what you had in it when you were down at Chelmsford in connection
with that bank murder--what an amazing case that was, by the way, and
didn’t your methods of research astonish the police!” As he still
looked up wistfully at the case, Thorndyke good-naturedly lifted it
down and unlocked it. As a matter of fact he was rather proud of his
“portable laboratory,” and certainly it was a triumph of
condensation, for, small as it was--only a foot square by four inches
deep--it contained a fairly complete outfit for a preliminary
investigation.

“Wonderful!” exclaimed Boscovitch, when the case lay open before him,
displaying its rows of little reagent bottles, tiny test-tubes,
diminutive spirit-lamp, dwarf microscope and assorted instruments on
the same Lilliputian scale; “it’s like a doll’s house--everything
looks as if it was seen through the wrong end of a telescope. But are
these tiny things really efficient? That microscope now----”

“Perfectly efficient at low and moderate magnifications,” said
Thorndyke. “It looks like a toy, but it isn’t one; the lenses are the
best that can be had. Of course a full-sized instrument would be
infinitely more convenient--but I shouldn’t have it with me, and
should have to make shift with a pocket-lens. And so with the rest of
the under-sized appliances; they are the alternative to no
appliances.”

Boscovitch pored over the case and its contents, fingering the
instruments delicately and asking questions innumerable about their
uses; indeed, his curiosity was but half appeased when, half-an-hour
later, the train began to slow down.

“By Jove!” he exclaimed, starting up and seizing his bag, “here we
are at the junction already. You change here too, don’t you?”

“Yes,” replied Thorndyke. “We take the branch train on to Warmington.”

As we stepped out onto the platform, we became aware that something
unusual was happening or had happened. All the passengers and most of
the porters and supernumeraries were gathered at one end of the
station, and all were looking intently into the darkness down the
line.

“Anything wrong?” asked Mr. Boscovitch, addressing the
station-inspector.

“Yes, sir,” the official replied; “a man has been run over by the
goods train about a mile down the line. The station master has gone
down with a stretcher to bring him in, and I expect that is his
lantern that you see coming this way.”

As we stood watching the dancing light grow momentarily brighter,
flashing fitful reflections from the burnished rails, a man came out
of the booking-office and joined the group of onlookers. He attracted
my attention, as I afterwards remembered, for two reasons: in the
first place his round, jolly face was excessively pale and bore a
strained and wild expression, and, in the second, though he stared
into the darkness with eager curiosity he asked no questions.

The swinging lantern continued to approach, and then suddenly two men
came into sight bearing a stretcher covered with a tarpaulin, through
which the shape of a human figure was dimly discernible. They
ascended the slope to the platform, and proceeded with their burden
to the lamp-room, when the inquisitive gaze of the passengers was
transferred to a porter who followed carrying a handbag and umbrella
and to the station-master who brought up the rear with his lantern.

As the porter passed, Mr. Boscovitch started forward with sudden
excitement.

“Is that his umbrella?” he asked.

“Yes, sir,” answered the porter, stopping and holding it out for the
speaker’s inspection.

“My God!” ejaculated Boscovitch; then, turning sharply to Thorndyke,
he exclaimed: “That’s Brodski’s umbrella. I could swear to it. You
remember Brodski?”

Thorndyke nodded, and Boscovitch, turning once more to the porter,
said: “I identify that umbrella. It belongs to a gentleman named
Brodski. If you look in his hat, you will see his name written in it.
He always writes his name in his hat.”

“We haven’t found his hat yet,” said the porter; “but here is the
station-master.” He turned to his superior and announced: “This
gentleman, sir, has identified the umbrella.”

“Oh,” said the station-master, “you recognize the umbrella, sir, do
you? Then perhaps you would step into the lamp-room and see if you
can identify the body.”

Mr. Boscovitch recoiled with a look of alarm. “Is it--is he--very
much injured?” he asked nervously.

“Well, yes,” was the reply. “You see, the engine and six of the
trucks went over him before they could stop the train. Took his head
clean off, in fact.”

“Shocking! shocking!” gasped Boscovitch. “I think--if you don’t
mind--I’d--I’d rather not. You don’t think it necessary, doctor, do
you?”

“Yes, I do,” replied Thorndyke. “Early identification may be of the
first importance.”

“Then I suppose I must,” said Boscovitch; and, with extreme
reluctance, he followed the station-master to the lamp-room, as the
loud ringing of the bell announced the approach of the boat train.
His inspection must have been of the briefest, for, in a few moments,
he burst out, pale and awe-stricken, and rushed up to Thorndyke.

“It is!” he exclaimed breathlessly. “It’s Brodski! Poor old Brodski!
Horrible! horrible! He was to have met me here and come on with me to
Amsterdam.”

“Had he any--merchandize about him?” Thorndyke asked; and, as he
spoke, the stranger whom I had previously noticed edged up closer as
if to catch the reply.

“He had some stones, no doubt,” answered Boscovitch, “but I don’t
know what they were. His clerk will know, of course. By the way,
doctor, could you watch the case for me? Just to be sure it was
really an accident or--you know what. We were old friends, you know,
fellow townsmen, too; we were both born in Warsaw. I’d like you to
give an eye to the case.”

“Very well,” said Thorndyke. “I will satisfy myself that there is
nothing more than appears, and let you have a report. Will that do?”

“Thank you,” said Boscovitch. “It’s excessively good of you, doctor.
Ah, here comes the train. I hope it won’t inconvenience you to stay
and see to the matter.”

“Not in the least,” replied Thorndyke. “We are not due at Warmington
until tomorrow afternoon, and I expect we can find out all that is
necessary to know and still keep our appointment.”

As Thorndyke spoke, the stranger, who had kept close to us with the
evident purpose of hearing what was said, bestowed on him a very
curious and attentive look; and it was only when the train had
actually come to rest by the platform that he hurried away to find a
compartment.

No sooner had the train left the station than Thorndyke sought out
the station-master and informed him of the instructions that he had
received from Boscovitch. “Of course,” he added, in conclusion, “we
must not move in the matter until the police arrive. I suppose they
have been informed?”

“Yes,” replied the station-master; “I sent a message at once to the
Chief Constable, and I expect him or an inspector at any moment. In
fact, I think I will slip out to the approach and see if he is
coming.” He evidently wished to have a word in private with the
police officer before committing himself to any statement.

As the official departed, Thorndyke and I began to pace the now empty
platform, and my friend, as was his wont, when entering on a new
inquiry, meditatively reviewed the features of the problem.

“In a case of this kind,” he remarked, “we have to decide on one of
three possible explanations: accident, suicide or homicide; and our
decision will be determined by inferences from three sets of facts:
first, the general facts of the case; second, the special data
obtained by examination of the body, and, third, the special data
obtained by examining the spot on which the body was found. Now the
only general facts at present in our possession are that the deceased
was a diamond merchant making a journey for a specific purpose and
probably having on his person property of small bulk and great value.
These facts are somewhat against the hypothesis of suicide and
somewhat favourable to that of homicide. Facts relevant to the
question of accident would be the existence or otherwise of a level
crossing, a road or path leading to the line, an enclosing fence with
or without a gate, and any other facts rendering probable or
otherwise the accidental presence of the deceased at the spot where
the body was found. As we do not possess these facts, it is desirable
that we extend our knowledge.”

“Why not put a few discreet questions to the porter who brought in
the bag and umbrella?” I suggested. “He is at this moment in earnest
conversation with the ticket collector and would, no doubt, be glad
of a new listener.”

“An excellent suggestion, Jervis,” answered Thorndyke. “Let us see
what he has to tell us.” We approached the porter and found him, as I
had anticipated, bursting to unburden himself of the tragic story.

“The way the thing happened, sir, was this,” he said, in answer to
Thorndyke’s question: “There’s a sharpish bend in the road just at
that place, and the goods train was just rounding the curve when the
driver suddenly caught sight of something lying across the rails. As
the engine turned, the headlights shone on it and then he saw it was
a man. He shut off steam at once, blew his whistle, and put the
brakes down hard, but, as you know, sir, a goods train takes some
stopping; before they could bring her up, the engine and half-a-dozen
trucks had gone over the poor beggar.”

“Could the driver see how the man was lying?” Thorndyke asked.

“Yes, he could see him quite plain, because the head lights were full
on him. He was lying on his face with his neck over the near rail on
the down side. His head was in the four-foot and his body by the side
of the track. It looked as if he had laid himself out a-purpose.”

“Is there a level crossing thereabouts?” asked Thorndyke.

“No, sir. No crossing, no road, no path, no nothing,” said the
porter, ruthlessly sacrificing grammar to emphasis. “He must have
come across the fields and climbed over the fence to get onto the
permanent way. Deliberate suicide is what it looks like.”

“How did you learn all this?” Thorndyke inquired.

“Why, the driver, you see, sir, when him and his mate had lifted the
body off the track, went on to the next signal box and sent in his
report by telegram. The station-master told me all about it as we
walked down the line.”

Thorndyke thanked the man for his information, and, as we strolled
back towards the lamp-room, discussed the bearing of these new facts.

“Our friend is unquestionably right in one respect,” he said; “this
was not an accident. The man might, if he were near-sighted, deaf or
stupid, have climbed over the fence and got knocked down by the
train. But his position, lying across the rails, can only be
explained by one of two hypotheses: either it was, as the porter
says, deliberate suicide, or else the man was already dead or
insensible. We must leave it at that until we have seen the body,
that is, if the police will allow us to see it. But here comes the
station-master and an officer with him. Let us hear what they have to
say.”

The two officials had evidently made up their minds to decline any
outside assistance. The divisional surgeon would make the necessary
examination, and information could be obtained through the usual
channels. The production of Thorndyke’s card, however, somewhat
altered the situation. The police inspector hummed and hawed
irresolutely, with the card in his hand, but finally agreed to allow
us to view the body, and we entered the lamp-room together, the
station-master leading the way to turn up the gas.

The stretcher stood on the floor by one wall, its grim burden still
hidden by the tarpaulin, and the hand-bag and umbrella lay on a large
box, together with the battered frame of a pair of spectacles from
which the glasses had fallen out.

“Were these spectacles found by the body?” Thorndyke inquired.

“Yes,” replied the station-master. “They were close to the head and
the glass was scattered about on the ballast.”

Thorndyke made a note in his pocket-book, and then, as he inspector
removed the tarpaulin, he glanced down on the corpse, lying limply on
the stretcher and looking grotesquely horrible with its displaced
head and distorted limbs. For fully a minute he remained silently
stooping over the uncanny object, on which the inspector was now
throwing the light of a large lantern; then he stood up and said
quietly to me: “I think we can eliminate two out of the three
hypotheses.”

The inspector looked at him quickly, and was about to ask a question,
when his attention was diverted by the travelling-case which
Thorndyke had laid on a shelf and now opened to abstract a couple of
pairs of dissecting forceps.

“We’ve no authority to make a _post mortem_, you know,” said the
inspector.

“No, of course not,” said Thorndyke. “I am merely going to look into
the mouth.” With one pair of forceps he turned back the lip and,
having scrutinized its inner surface, closely examined the teeth.

“May I trouble you for your lens, Jervis?” he said; and, as I handed
him my doublet ready opened, the inspector brought the lantern close
to the dead face and leaned forward eagerly. In his usual systematic
fashion, Thorndyke slowly passed the lens along the whole range of
sharp, uneven teeth, and then, bringing it back to the centre,
examined with more minuteness the upper incisors. At length, very
delicately, he picked out with his forceps some minute object from
between two of the upper front teeth and held it in the focus of the
lens. Anticipating his next move, I took a labelled microscope-slide
from the case and handed it to him together with a dissecting needle,
and, as he transferred the object to the slide and spread it out with
the needle, I set up the little microscope on the shelf.

“A drop of Farrant and a cover-glass, please, Jervis,” said Thorndyke.

I handed him the bottle, and, when he had let a drop of the mounting
fluid fall gently on the object and put on the cover-slip, he placed
the slide on the stage of the microscope and examined it attentively.

Happening to glance at the inspector, I observed on his countenance a
faint grin, which he politely strove to suppress when he caught my
eye.

“I was thinking, sir,” he said apologetically, “that it’s a bit off
the track to be finding out what he had for dinner. He didn’t die of
unwholesome feeding.”

Thorndyke looked up with a smile. “It doesn’t do, inspector, to
assume that anything is off the track in an inquiry of this kind.
Every fact must have some significance, you know.”

“I don’t see any significance in the diet of a man who has had his
head cut off,” the inspector rejoined defiantly.

“Don’t you?” said Thorndyke. “Is there no interest attaching to the
last meal of a man who has met a violent death? These crumbs, for
instance, that are scattered over the dead man’s waistcoat. Can we
learn nothing from them?”

“I don’t see what you can learn,” was the dogged rejoinder.

Thorndyke picked off the crumbs, one by one, with his forceps, and
having deposited them on a slide, inspected them, first with the lens
and then through the microscope.

“I learn,” said he, “that shortly before his death, the deceased
partook of some kind of whole-meal biscuits, apparently composed
partly of oatmeal.”

“I call that nothing,” said the inspector. “The question that we have
got to settle is not what refreshments had the deceased been taking,
but what was the cause of his death: did he commit suicide? was he
killed by accident? or was there any foul play?”

“I beg your pardon,” said Thorndyke, “the questions that remain to be
settled are, who killed the deceased and with what motive? The others
are already answered as far as I am concerned.”

The inspector stared in sheer amazement not unmixed with incredulity.

“You haven’t been long coming to a conclusion, sir,” he said.

“No, it was a pretty obvious case of murder,” said Thorndyke. “As to
the motive, the deceased was a diamond merchant and is believed to
have had a quantity of stones about his person. I should suggest that
you search the body.”

The inspector gave vent to an exclamation of disgust. “I see,” he
said. “It was just a guess on your part. The dead man was a diamond
merchant and had valuable property about him; therefore he was
murdered.” He drew himself up, and, regarding Thorndyke with stern
reproach, added: “But you must understand, sir, that this is a
judicial inquiry, not a prize competition in a penny paper. And, as
to searching the body, why, that is what I principally came for.” He
ostentatiously turned his back on us and proceeded systematically to
turn out the dead man’s pockets, laying the articles, as he removed
them, on the box by the side of the hand-bag and umbrella.

While he was thus occupied, Thorndyke looked over the body generally,
paying special attention to the soles of the boots, which, to the
inspector’s undissembled amusement, he very thoroughly examined with
the lens.

“I should have thought, sir, that his feet were large enough to be
seen with the naked eye,” was his comment; “but perhaps,” he added,
with a sly glance at the station master, “you’re a little
near-sighted.”

Thorndyke chuckled good-humouredly, and, while the officer continued
his search, he looked over the articles that had already been laid on
the box. The purse and pocket book he naturally left for the
inspector to open, but the reading-glasses, pocket-knife and
card-case and other small pocket articles were subjected to a
searching scrutiny. The inspector watched him out of the corner of
his eye with furtive amusement; saw him hold up the glasses to the
light to estimate their refractive power, peer into the tobacco
pouch, open the cigarette book and examine the watermark of the
paper, and even inspect the contents of the silver match-box.

“What might you have expected to find in his tobacco pouch?” the
officer asked, laying down a bunch of keys from the dead man’s pocket.

“Tobacco,” Thorndyke replied stolidly; “but I did not expect to find
fine-cut Latakia. I don’t remember ever having seen pure Latakia
smoked in cigarettes.”

“You do take an interest in things, sir,” said the inspector, with a
side glance at the stolid station-master.

“I do,” Thorndyke agreed; “and I note that there are no diamonds
among this collection.”

“No, and we don’t know that he had any about him; but there’s a gold
watch and chain, a diamond scarf-pin, and a purse containing”--he
opened it and tipped out its contents into his hand--“twelve pounds
in gold. That doesn’t look much like robbery, does it? What do you
say to the murder theory now?”

“My opinion is unchanged,” said Thorndyke, “and I should like to
examine the spot where the body was found. Has the engine been
inspected?” he added, addressing the station-master.

“I telegraphed to Bradfield to have it examined,” the official
answered. “The report has probably come in by now. I’d better see
before we start down the line.”

We emerged from the lamp-room and, at the door, found the
station-inspector waiting with a telegram. He handed it to the
station-master, who read it aloud.

“The engine has been carefully examined by me. I find small smear of
blood on near leading wheel and smaller one on next wheel following.
No other marks.” He glanced questioningly at Thorndyke, who nodded
and remarked: “It will be interesting to see if the line tells the
same tale.”

The station-master looked puzzled and was apparently about to ask for
an explanation; but the inspector, who had carefully pocketed the
dead man’s property, was impatient to start and, accordingly, when
Thorndyke had repacked his case and had, at his own request, been
furnished with a lantern, we set off down the permanent way,
Thorndyke carrying the light and I the indispensable green case.

“I am a little in the dark about this affair,” I said, when we had
allowed the two officials to draw ahead out of ear shot; “you came to
a conclusion remarkably quickly. What was it that so immediately
determined the opinion of murder as against suicide?”

“It was a small matter but very conclusive,” replied Thorndyke. “You
noticed a small scalp-wound above the left temple? It was a glancing
wound, and might easily have been made by the engine. But--the wound
had bled; and it had bled for an appreciable time. There were two
streams of blood from it, and in both the blood was firmly clotted
and partially dried. But the man had been decapitated; and this
wound, if inflicted by the engine, must have been made after the
decapitation, since it was on the side most distant from the engine
as it approached. Now, a decapitated head does not bleed. Therefore,
this wound was inflicted before the decapitation.

“But not only had the wound bled: the blood had trickled down in two
streams at right angles to one another. First, in the order of time
as shown by the appearance of the stream, it had trickled down the
side of the face and dropped on the collar. The second stream ran
from the wound to the back of the head. Now, you know, Jervis, there
are no exceptions to the law of gravity. If the blood ran down the
face towards the chin, the face must have been upright at the time;
and if the blood trickled from the front to the back of the head, the
head must have been horizontal and face upwards. But the man when he
was seen by the engine driver, was lying _face downwards_. The only
possible inference is that when the wound was inflicted, the man was
in the upright position--standing or sitting; and that subsequently,
and while he was still alive, he lay on his back for a sufficiently
long time for the blood to have trickled to the back of his head.”

“I see. I was a duffer not to have reasoned this out for myself,” I
remarked contritely.

“Quick observation and rapid inference come by practice,” replied
Thorndyke. “What did you notice about the face?”

“I thought there was a strong suggestion of asphyxia.”

“Undoubtedly,” said Thorndyke. “It was the face of a suffocated man.
You must have noticed, too, that the tongue was very distinctly
swollen and that on the inside of the upper lip were deep
indentations made by the teeth, as well as one or two slight wounds,
obviously caused by heavy pressure on the mouth. And now observe how
completely these facts and inferences agree with those from the scalp
wound. If we knew that the deceased had received a blow on the head,
had struggled with his assailant and been finally borne down and
suffocated, we should look for precisely those signs which we have
found.”

“By the way, what was it that you found wedged between the teeth? I
did not get a chance to look through the microscope.”

“Ah!” said Thorndyke, “there we not only get confirmation, but we
carry our inferences a stage further. The object was a little tuft of
some textile fabric. Under the microscope I found it to consist of
several different fibres, differently dyed. The bulk of it consisted
of wool fibres dyed crimson, but there were also cotton fibres dyed
blue and a few which looked like jute, dyed yellow. It was obviously
a parti-coloured fabric and might have been part of a woman’s dress,
though the presence of the jute is much more suggestive of a curtain
or rug of inferior quality.”

“And its importance?”

“Is that, if it is not part of an article of clothing, then it must
have come from an article of furniture, and furniture suggests a
habitation.”

“That doesn’t seem very conclusive,” I objected.

“It is not; but it is valuable corroboration.”

“Of what?”

“Of the suggestion offered by the soles of the dead man’s boots. I
examined them most minutely and could find no trace of sand, gravel
or earth, in spite of the fact that he must have crossed fields and
rough land to reach the place where he was found. What I did find was
fine tobacco ash, a charred mark as if a cigar or cigarette had been
trodden on, Several crumbs of biscuit, and, on a projecting brad,
some coloured fibres, apparently from a carpet. The manifest
suggestion is that the man was killed in a house with a carpeted
floor, and carried from thence to the railway.”

I was silent for some moments. Well as I knew Thorndyke, I was
completely taken by surprise; a sensation, indeed, that I experienced
anew every time that I accompanied him on one of his investigations.
His marvellous power of co-ordinating apparently insignificant facts,
of arranging them into an ordered sequence and making them tell a
coherent story, was a phenomenon that I never got used to; every
exhibition of it astonished me afresh.

“If your inferences are correct,” I said, “the problem is practically
solved. There must be abundant traces inside the house. The only
question is, which house is it?”

“Quite so,” replied Thorndyke; “that is the question, and a very
difficult question it is. A glance at that interior would doubtless
clear up the whole mystery. But how are we to get that glance? We
cannot enter houses speculatively to see if they present traces of a
murder. At present, our clue breaks off abruptly. The other end of it
is in some unknown house, and, if we cannot join up the two ends, our
problem remains unsolved. For the question is, you remember, Who
killed Oscar Brodski?”

“Then what do you propose to do?” I asked.

“The next stage of the inquiry is to connect some particular house
with this crime. To that end, I can only gather up all available
facts and consider each in all its possible bearings. If I cannot
establish any such connection, then the inquiry will have failed and
we shall have to make a fresh start--say, at Amsterdam, if it turns
out that Brodski really had diamonds on his person, as I have no
doubt he had.” Here our conversation was interrupted by our arrival
at the spot where the body had been found. The station-master had
halted, and he and the inspector were now examining the near rail by
the light of their lanterns.

“There’s remarkably little blood about,” said the former. “I’ve seen
a good many accidents of this kind and there has always been a lot of
blood, both on the engine and on the road. It’s very curious.”

Thorndyke glanced at the rail with but slight attention: that
question had ceased to interest him. But the light of his lantern
flashed onto the ground at the side of the track--a loose, gravelly
soil mixed with fragments of chalk--and from thence to the soles of
the inspector’s boots, which were displayed as he knelt by the rail.

“You observe, Jervis?” he said in a low voice, and I nodded. The
inspector’s boot-soles were covered with adherent particles of gravel
and conspicuously marked by the chalk on which he had trodden.

“You haven’t found the hat, I suppose?” Thorndyke asked, stooping to
pick up a short piece of string that lay on the ground at the side of
the track.

“No,” replied the inspector, “but it can’t be far off. You seem to
have found another clue, sir,” he added, with a grin, glancing at the
piece of string.

“Who knows,” said Thorndyke. “A short end of white twine with a green
strand in it. It may tell us something later. At any rate we’ll keep
it,” and, taking from his pocket a small tin box containing, among
other things, a number of seed envelopes, he slipped the string into
one of the latter and scribbled a note in pencil on the outside. The
inspector watched his proceedings with an indulgent smile, and then
returned to his examination of the track, in which Thorndyke now
joined.

“I suppose the poor chap was near-sighted,” the officer remarked,
indicating the remains of the shattered spectacles; “that might
account for his having strayed onto the line.”

“Possibly,” said Thorndyke. He had already noticed the fragments
scattered over a sleeper and the adjacent ballast, and now once more
produced his “collecting-box,” from which he took another seed
envelope. “Would you hand me a pair of forceps, Jervis,” he said;
“and perhaps you wouldn’t mind taking a pair yourself and helping me
to gather up these fragments.”

As I complied, the inspector looked up curiously.

“There isn’t any doubt that these spectacles belonged to the
deceased, is there?” he asked. “He certainly wore spectacles, for I
saw the mark on his nose.”

“Still, there is no harm in verifying the fact,” said Thorndyke, and
he added to me in a lower tone, “Pick up every particle you can find,
Jervis. It may be most important.”

“I don’t quite see how,” I said, groping amongst the shingle by the
light of the lantern in search of the tiny splinters of glass.

“Don’t you?” returned Thorndyke. “Well, look at these fragments; some
of them are a fair size, but many of these on the sleeper are mere
grains. And consider their number. Obviously, the condition of the
glass does not agree with the circumstances in which we find it.
These are thick con cave spectacle-lenses broken into a great number
of minute fragments. Now how were they broken? Not merely by falling,
evidently: such a lens, when it is dropped, breaks into a small
number of large pieces. Nor were they broken by the wheel passing
over them, for they would then have been reduced to fine powder, and
that powder would have been visible on the rail, which it is not. The
spectacle frames, you may remember, presented the same incongruity:
they were battered and damaged more than they would have been by
falling, but not nearly so much as they would have been if the wheel
had passed over them.”

“What do you suggest, then?” I asked.

“The appearances suggest that the spectacles had been trodden on.
But, if the body was carried here the probability is that the
spectacles were carried here too, and that they were then already
broken; for it is more likely that they were trodden on during the
struggle than that the murderer trod on them after bringing them
here. Hence the importance of picking up every fragment.”

“But why?” I inquired, rather foolishly, I must admit.

“Because, if, when we have picked up every fragment that we can find,
there still remains missing a larger portion of the lenses than we
could reasonably expect, that would tend to support our hypothesis
and we might find the missing remainder elsewhere. If, on the other
hand, we find as much of the lenses as we could expect to find, we
must conclude that they were broken on this spot.”

While we were conducting our search, the two officials were circling
around with their lanterns in quest of the missing hat; and, when we
had at length picked up the last fragment, and a careful search, even
aided by a lens, failed to reveal any other, we could see their
lanterns moving, like will-o’-the-wisps, some distance down the line.

“We may as well see what we have got before our friends come back,”
said Thorndyke, glancing at the twinkling lights. “Lay the case down
on the grass by the fence; it will serve for a table.”

I did so, and Thorndyke, taking a letter from his pocket, opened it,
spread it out flat on the case, securing it with a couple of heavy
stones, although the night was quite calm. Then he tipped the
contents of the seed envelope out on the paper, and carefully
spreading out the pieces of glass, looked at them for some moments in
silence. And, as he looked, there stole over his face a very curious
expression; with sudden eagerness he began picking out the large
fragments and laying them on two visiting-cards which he had taken
from his card-case. Rapidly and with wonderful deftness he fitted the
pieces together, and, as the reconstituted lenses began gradually to
take shape on their cards I looked on with growing excitement, for
something in my colleague’s manner told me that we were on the verge
of a discovery.

At length the two ovals of glass lay on their respective cards,
complete save for one or two small gaps; and the little heap that
remained consisted of fragments so minute as to render further
reconstruction impossible. Then Thorndyke leaned back and laughed
softly.

“This is certainly an unlooked-for result,” said he.

“What is?” I asked.

“Don’t you see, my dear fellow? _There’s too much glass._ We have
almost completely built up the broken lenses, and the fragments that
are left over are considerably more than are required to fill up the
gaps.”

I looked at the little heap of small fragments and saw at once that
it was as he had said. There was a surplus of small pieces.

“This is very extraordinary,” I said. “What do you think can be the
explanation?”

“The fragments will probably tell us,” he replied, “if we ask them
intelligently.”

He lifted the paper and the two cards carefully onto the ground, and,
opening the case, took out the little microscope, to which he fitted
the lowest-power objective and eye-piece--having a combined
magnification of only ten diameters. Then he transferred the minute
fragments of glass to a slide, and, having arranged the lantern as a
microscope-lamp, commenced his examination.

“Hal” he exclaimed presently. “The plot thickens. There is too much
glass and yet too little; that is to say, there are only one or two
fragments here that belong to the spectacles; not nearly enough to
complete the building up of the lenses. The remainder consists of a
soft, uneven, moulded glass, easily distinguished from the clear,
hard optical glass. These foreign fragments are all curved, as if
they had formed part of a cylinder, and are, I should say, portions
of a wine-glass or tumbler.” He moved the slide once or twice, and
then continued: “We are in luck, Jervis. Here is a fragment with two
little diverging lines etched on it, evidently the points of an
eight-rayed star--and here is another with three points--the ends of
three rays. This enables us to reconstruct the vessel perfectly. It
was a clear, thin glass--probably a tumbler--decorated with scattered
stars; I dare say you know the pattern. Sometimes there is an
ornamented band in addition, but generally the stars form the only
decoration. Have a look at the specimen.”

I had just applied my eye to the microscope when the station-master
and the inspector came up. Our appearance, seated on the ground with
the microscope between us, was too much for the police officer’s
gravity, and he laughed long and joyously.

“You must excuse me, gentlemen,” he said apologetically, “but really,
you know, to an old hand, like myself, it does look a
little--well--you understand--I dare say a microscope is a very
interesting and amusing thing, but it doesn’t get you much forrader
in a case like this, does it?”

“Perhaps not,” replied Thorndyke. “By the way, where did you find the
hat, after all?”

“We haven’t found it,” the inspector replied.

“Then we must help you to continue the search,” said Thorndyke. “If
you will wait a few moments, we will come with you.” He poured a few
drops of xylol balsam on the cards to fix the reconstituted lenses to
their supports and then, packing them and the microscope in the case,
announced that he was ready to start.

“Is there any village or hamlet near?” he asked the station-master.

“None nearer than Corfield. That is about half-a-mile from here.”

“And where is the nearest road?”

“There is a half-made road that runs past a house about three hundred
yards from here. It belonged to a building estate that was never
built. There is a footpath from it to the station.”

“Are there any other houses near?”

“No. That is the only house for half-a-mile round, and there is no
other road near here.”

“Then the probability is that Brodski approached the rail way from
that direction, as he was found on that side of the permanent way.”

The inspector agreeing with this view, we all set off slowly towards
the house, piloted by the station-master and searching the ground as
we went. The waste land over which we passed was covered with patches
of docks and nettles, through each of which the inspector kicked his
way, searching with feet and lantern for the missing hat. A walk of
three hundred yards brought us to a low wall enclosing a garden,
beyond which we could see a small house; and here we halted while the
inspector waded into a large bed of nettles beside the wall and
kicked vigorously. Suddenly there came a clinking sound mingled with
objurgations, and the inspector hopped out holding one foot and
soliloquizing profanely.

“I wonder what sort of a fool put a thing like that into a bed of
nettles!” he exclaimed, stroking the injured foot. Thorndyke picked
the object up and held it in the light of the lantern, displaying a
piece of three-quarter inch rolled iron bar about a foot long. “It
doesn’t seem to have been here very long,” he observed, examining it
closely, “there is hardly any rust on it.”

“It has been there long enough for me,” growled the inspector, “and
I’d like to bang it on the head of the blighter that put it there.”

Callously indifferent to the inspector’s sufferings, Thorndyke
continued calmly to examine the bar. At length, resting his lantern
on the wall, he produced his pocket-lens, with which he resumed his
investigation, a proceeding that so exasperated the inspector that
that afflicted official limped off in dudgeon, followed by the
station-master, and we heard him, presently, rapping at the front
door of the house.

“Give me a slide, Jervis, with a drop of Farrant on it,” said
Thorndyke. “There are some fibres sticking to this bar.”

I prepared the slide, and, having handed it to him together with a
cover-glass, a pair of forceps and a needle, set up the microscope on
the wall.

“I’m sorry for the inspector,” Thorndyke remarked, with his eye
applied to the little instrument, “but that was a lucky kick for us.
Just take a look at the specimen.”

I did so, and, having moved the slide about until I had seen the
whole of the object, I gave my opinion. “Red wool fibres, blue cotton
fibres and some yellow vegetable fibres that look like jute.”

“Yes,” said Thorndyke; “the same combination of fibres as that which
we found on the dead man’s teeth and probably from the same source.
This bar has probably been wiped on that very curtain or rug with
which poor Brodski was stifled. We will place it on the wall for
future reference, and meanwhile, by hook or by crook, we must get
into that house. This is much too plain a hint to be disregarded.”

Hastily repacking the case, we hurried to the front of the house,
where we found the two officials looking rather vaguely up the unmade
road.

“There’s a light in the house,” said the inspector, “but there’s no
one at home. I have knocked a dozen times and got no answer. And I
don’t see what we are hanging about here for at all. The hat is
probably close to where the body was found, and we shall find it in
the morning.”

Thorndyke made no reply, but, entering the garden, stepped up the
path, and having knocked gently at the door, stooped and listened
attentively at the keyhole.

“I tell you there’s no one in the house, sir,” said the inspector
irritably; and, as Thorndyke continued to listen, he walked away,
muttering angrily. As soon as he was gone, Thorndyke flashed his
lantern over the door, the threshold, the path and the small
flower-beds; and, from one of the latter, I presently saw him stoop
and pick something up.

“Here is a highly instructive object, Jervis,” he said, coming out to
the gate, and displaying a cigarette of which only half-an-inch had
been smoked.

“How instructive?” I asked. “What do you learn from it?”

“Many things,” he replied. “It has been lit and thrown away unsmoked;
that indicates a sudden change of purpose. It was thrown away at the
entrance to the house, almost certainly by some one entering it. That
person was probably a stranger, or he would have taken it in with
him. But he had not expected to enter the house, or he would not have
lit it. These are the general suggestions; now as to the particular
ones. The paper of the cigarette is of the kind known as the
‘Zig-Zag’ brand; the very conspicuous watermark is quite easy to see.
Now Brodski’s cigarette book was a ‘Zig-Zag’ book--so called from the
way in which the papers pull out. But let us see what the tobacco is
like.” With a pin from his coat, he hooked out from the unburned end
a wisp of dark, dirty brown tobacco, which he held out for my
inspection.

“Fine-cut Latakia,” I pronounced, without hesitation.

“Very well,” said Thorndyke. “Here is a cigarette made of an unusual
tobacco similar to that in Brodski’s pouch and wrapped in an unusual
paper similar to those in Brodski’s cigarette book. With due regard
to the fourth rule of the syllogism, I suggest that this cigarette
was made by Oscar Brodski. But, nevertheless, we will look for
corroborative detail.”

“What is that?” I asked.

“You may have noticed that Brodski’s match-box contained round wooden
vestas--which are also rather unusual. As he must have lighted the
cigarette within a few steps of the gate, we ought to be able to find
the match with which he lighted it. Let us try up the road in the
direction from which he would probably have approached.”

We walked very slowly up the road, searching the ground with the
lantern, and we had hardly gone a dozen paces when I espied a match
lying on the rough path and eagerly picked it up. It was a round
wooden vesta.

Thorndyke examined it with interest and having deposited it, with the
cigarette, in his “collecting-box,” turned to retrace his steps.
“There is now, Jervis, no reasonable doubt that Brodski was murdered
in that house. We have succeeded in connecting that house with the
crime, and now we have got to force an entrance and join up the other
clues.” We walked quickly back to the rear of the premises, where we
found the inspector conversing disconsolately with the station-master.

“I think, sir,” said the former, “we had better go back now; in fact,
I don’t see what we came here for, but--here! I say, sir, you mustn’t
do that!” For Thorndyke, without a word of warning, had sprung up
lightly and thrown one of his long legs over the wall.

“I can’t allow you to enter private premises, sir,” continued the
inspector; but Thorndyke quietly dropped down on the inside and
turned to face the officer over the wall.

“Now, listen to me, inspector,” said he. “I have good reasons for
believing that the dead man, Brodski, has been in this house, in
fact, I am prepared to swear an information to that effect. But time
is precious; we must follow the scent while it is hot. And I am not
proposing to break into the house off-hand. I merely wish to examine
the dust-bin.”

“The dust-bin!” gasped the inspector. “Well, you really are a most
extraordinary gentleman! What do you expect to find in the dust-bin?”

“I am looking for a broken tumbler or wine-glass. It is a thin glass
vessel decorated with a pattern of small, eight pointed stars. It may
be in the dust-bin or it may be inside the house.”

The inspector hesitated, but Thorndyke’s confident manner had
evidently impressed him.

“We can soon see what is in the dust-bin,” he said, “though what in
creation a broken tumbler has to do with the case is more than I can
understand. However, here goes.” He sprang up onto the wall, and, as
he dropped down into the garden, the station-master and I followed.

Thorndyke lingered a few moments by the gate examining the ground,
while the two officials hurried up the path. Finding nothing of
interest, however, he walked towards the house, looking keenly about
him as he went; but we were hardly half-way up the path when we heard
the voice of the inspector calling excitedly.

“Here you are, sir, this way,” he sang out, and, as we hurried
forward, we suddenly came on the two officials standing over a small
rubbish-heap and looking the picture of astonishment. The glare of
their lanterns illuminated the heap, and showed us the scattered
fragments of a thin glass, star-pattern tumbler.

“I can’t imagine how you guessed it was here, sir,” said the
inspector, with a new-born respect in his tone, “nor what you’re
going to do with it now you have found it.”

“It is merely another link in the chain of evidence,” said Thorndyke,
taking a pair of forceps from the case and stooping over the heap.
“Perhaps we shall find something else.” He picked up several small
fragments of glass, looked at them closely and dropped them again.
Suddenly his eye caught a small splinter at the base of the heap.
Seizing it with the forceps, he held it close to his eye in the
strong lamplight, and, taking out his lens, examined it with minute
attention. “Yes,” he said at length, “this is what I was looking for.
Let me have those two cards, Jervis.”

I produced the two visiting-cards with the reconstructed lenses stuck
to them, and, laying them on the lid of the case, threw the light of
the lantern on them. Thorndyke looked at them intently for some time,
and from them to the fragment that he held. Then, turning to the
inspector, he said: “You saw me pick up this splinter of glass?”

“Yes, sir,” replied the officer.

“And you saw where we found these spectacle-glasses and know whose
they were?”

“Yes, sir. They are the dead man’s spectacles, and you found them
where the body had been.”

“Very well,” said Thorndyke; “now observe;” and, as the two officials
craned forward with parted lips, he laid the little splinter in a gap
in one of the lenses and then gave it a gentle push forward, when it
occupied the gap perfectly, joining edge to edge with the adjacent
fragments and rendering that portion of the lens complete.

“My God!” exclaimed the inspector. “How on earth did you know?”

“I must explain that later,” said Thorndyke. “Meanwhile we had better
have a look inside the house. I expect to find there a cigarette--or
possibly a cigar--which has been trodden on, some whole-meal
biscuits, possibly a wooden vesta, and perhaps even the missing hat.”

At the mention of the hat, the inspector stepped eagerly to the back
door, but, finding it bolted, he tried the window. This also was
securely fastened and, on Thorndyke’s advice, we went round to the
front door.

“This door is locked too,” said the inspector. “I’m afraid we shall
have to break in. It’s a nuisance, though.”

“Have a look at the window,” suggested Thorndyke.

The officer did so, struggling vainly to undo the patent catch with
his pocket-knife.

“It’s no go,” he said, coming back to the door. “We shall have
to----” He broke off with an astonished stare, for the door stood
open and Thorndyke was putting something in his pocket.

“Your friend doesn’t waste much time--even in picking a lock,” he
remarked to me, as we followed Thorndyke into the house; but his
reflections were soon merged in a new surprise. Thorndyke had
preceded us into a small sitting-room dimly lighted by a hanging lamp
turned down low.

As we entered he turned up the light and glanced about the room. A
whisky-bottle was on the table, with a siphon, a tumbler and a
biscuit-box. Pointing to the latter, Thorndyke said to the inspector:
“See what is in that box.”

The inspector raised the lid and peeped in, the station master peered
over his shoulder, and then both stared at Thorndyke.

“How in the name of goodness did you know that there were whole-meal
biscuits in the house, sir?” exclaimed the station-master.

“You’d be disappointed if I told you,” replied Thorndyke. “But look
at this.” He pointed to the hearth, where lay a flattened,
half-smoked cigarette and a round wooden vesta. The inspector gazed
at these objects in silent wonder, while, as to the station-master,
he continued to stare at Thorndyke with what I can only describe as
superstitious awe.

“You have the dead man’s property with you, I believe?” said my
colleague.

“Yes,” replied the inspector; “I put the things in my pocket for
safety.”

“Then,” said Thorndyke, picking up the flattened cigarette, “let us
have a look at his tobacco-pouch.”

As the officer produced and opened the pouch, Thorndyke neatly cut
open the cigarette with his sharp pocket-knife. “Now,” said he, “what
kind of tobacco is in the pouch?”

The inspector took out a pinch, looked at it and smelt it
distastefully. “It’s one of those stinking tobaccos,” he said, “that
they put in mixtures--Latakia, I think.”

“And what is this?” asked Thorndyke, pointing to the open cigarette.

“Same stuff, undoubtedly,” replied the inspector.

“And now let us see his cigarette papers,” said Thorndyke.

The little book, or rather packet--for it consisted of separated
papers--was produced from the officer’s pocket and a sample paper
abstracted. Thorndyke laid the half burnt paper beside it, and the
inspector, having examined the two, held them up to the light.

“There isn’t much chance of mistaking that ‘Zig-Zag’ watermark,” he
said. “This cigarette was made by the deceased; there can’t be the
shadow of a doubt.”

“One more point,” said Thorndyke, laying the burnt wooden vesta on
the table. “You have his match-box?”

The inspector brought forth the little silver casket, opened it and
compared the wooden vestas that it contained with the burnt end. Then
he shut the box with a snap.

“You’ve proved it up to the hilt,” said he. “If we could only find
the hat, we should have a complete case.”

“I’m not sure that we haven’t found the hat,” said Thorndyke. “You
notice that something besides coal has been burned in the grate.”

The inspector ran eagerly to the fire-place and began with feverish
hands, to pick out the remains of the extinct fire. “The cinders are
still warm,” he said, “and they are certainly not all coal cinders.
There has been wood burned here on top of the coal, and these little
black lumps are neither coal nor wood. They may quite possibly be the
remains of a burnt hat, but, lord! who can tell? You can put together
the pieces of broken spectacle-glasses, but you can’t build up a hat
out of a few cinders.” He held out a handful of little, black, spongy
cinders and looked ruefully at Thorndyke, who took them from him and
laid them out on a sheet of paper.

“We can’t reconstitute the hat, certainly,” my friend agreed, “but we
may be able to ascertain the origin of these remains. They may not be
cinders of a hat, after all.” He lit a wax match and, taking up one
of the charred fragments, applied the flame to it. The cindery mass
fused at once with a crackling, seething sound, emitting a dense
smoke, and instantly the air became charged with a pungent, resinous
odour mingled with the smell of burning animal matter.

“Smells like varnish,” the station-master remarked.

“Yes. Shellac,” said Thorndyke; “so the first test gives a positive
result. The next test will take more time.”

He opened the green case and took from it a little flask, fitted for
Marsh’s arsenic test, with a safety funnel and escape tube, a small
folding tripod, a spirit lamp and a disc of asbestos to serve as a
sand-bath. Dropping into the flask several of the cindery masses,
selected after careful inspection, he filled it up with alcohol and
placed it on the disc, which he rested on the tripod. Then he lighted
the spirit lamp underneath and sat down to wait for the alcohol to
boil.

“There is one little point that we may as well settle,” he said
presently, as the bubbles began to rise in the flask. “Give me a
slide with a drop of Farrant on it, Jervis.”

I prepared the slide while Thorndyke, with a pair of forceps, picked
out a tiny wisp from the table-cloth. “I fancy we have seen this
fabric before,” he remarked, as he laid the little pinch of fluff in
the mounting fluid and slipped the slide onto the stage of the
microscope. “Yes,” he continued, looking into the eye-piece, “here
are our old acquaintances, the red wool fibres, the blue cotton and
the yellow jute. We must label this at once or we may confuse it with
the other specimens.”

“Have you any idea how the deceased met his death?” the inspector
asked.

“Yes,” replied Thorndyke. “I take it that the murderer enticed him
into this room and gave him some refreshments. The murderer sat in
the chair in which you are sitting, Brodski sat in that small
arm-chair. Then I imagine the murderer attacked him with that iron
bar that you found among the nettles, failed to kill him at the first
stroke, struggled with him and finally suffocated him with the
tablecloth. By the way, there is just one more point. You recognize
this piece of string?” He took from his “collecting-box” the little
end of twine that had been picked up by the line. The inspector
nodded. “Look behind you, you will see where it came from.”

The officer turned sharply and his eye lighted on a string box on the
mantelpiece. He lifted it down, and Thorndyke drew out from it a
length of white twine with one green strand, which he compared with
the piece in his hand. “The green strand in it makes the
identification fairly certain,” he said. “Of course the string was
used to secure the umbrella and hand-bag. He could not have carried
them in his hand, encumbered as he was with the corpse. But I expect
our other specimen is ready now.” He lifted the flask off the tripod,
and, giving it a vigorous shake, examined the contents through his
lens. The alcohol had now become dark-brown in colour, and was
noticeably thicker and more syrupy in consistence.

“I think we have enough here for a rough test,” said he, selecting a
pipette and a slide from the case. He dipped the former into the
flask and, having sucked up a few drops of the alcohol from the
bottom, held the pipette over the slide on which he allowed the
contained fluid to drop.

Laying a cover-glass on the little pool of alcohol, he put the slide
on the microscope stage and examined it attentively, while we watched
him in expectant silence.

At length he looked up, and, addressing the inspector, asked: “Do you
know what felt hats are made of?”

“I can’t say that I do, sir,” replied the officer.

“Well, the better quality hats are made of rabbits’ and hares’
wool--the soft under-fur, you know--cemented together with shellac.
Now there is very little doubt that these cinders contain shellac,
and with the microscope I find a number of small hairs of a rabbit. I
have, therefore, little hesitation in saying that these cinders are
the remains of a hard felt hat; and, as the hairs do not appear to be
dyed, I should say it was a grey hat.”

At this moment our conclave was interrupted by hurried footsteps on
the garden path and, as we turned with one accord, an elderly woman
burst into the room.

She stood for a moment in mute astonishment, and then, looking from
one to the other, demanded: “Who are you? and what are you doing
here?”

The inspector rose. “I am a police officer, madam,” said he. “I can’t
give you any further information just now, but, if you will excuse me
asking, who are you?”

“I am Mr. Hickler’s housekeeper,” she replied.

“And Mr. Hickler; are you expecting him home shortly?”

“No, I am not,” was the curt reply. “Mr. Hickler is away from home
just now. He left this evening by the boat train.”

“For Amsterdam?” asked Thorndyke.

“I believe so, though I don’t see what business it is of yours,” the
housekeeper answered.

“I thought he might, perhaps, be a diamond broker or merchant,” said
Thorndyke. “A good many of them travel by that train.”

“So he is,” said the woman, “at least, he has something to do with
diamonds.”

“Ah. Well, we must be going, Jervis,” said Thorndyke, “we have
finished here, and we have to find an hotel or inn. Can I have a word
with you, inspector?”

The officer, now entirely humble and reverent, followed us out into
the garden to receive Thorndyke’s parting advice.

“You had better take possession of the house at once, and get rid of
the housekeeper. Nothing must be removed. Preserve those cinders and
see that the rubbish-heap is not disturbed, and, above all, don’t
have the room swept. An officer will be sent to relieve you.”

With a friendly “good-night” we went on our way, guided by the
station-master; and here our connection with the case came to an end.
Hickler (whose Christian name turned out to be Silas) was, it is
true, arrested as he stepped ashore from the steamer, and a packet of
diamonds, subsequently identified as the property of Oscar Brodski,
found upon his person. But he was never brought to trial, for on the
return voyage he contrived to elude his guards for an instant as the
ship was approaching the English coast, and it was not until three
days later, when a hand-cuffed body was cast up on the lonely shore
by Orfordness, that the authorities knew the fate of Silas Hickler.

“An appropriate and dramatic end to a singular and yet typical case,”
said Thorndyke, as he put down the newspaper. “I hope it has enlarged
your knowledge, Jervis, and enabled you to form one or two useful
corollaries.”

“I prefer to hear you sing the medico-legal doxology,” I answered,
turning upon him like the proverbial worm and grinning derisively
(which the worm does not).

“I know you do,” he retorted, with mock gravity, “and I lament your
lack of mental initiative. However, the points that this case
illustrates are these: First, the danger of delay; the vital
importance of instant action before that frail and fleeting thing
that we call a clue has time to evaporate. A delay of a few hours
would have left us with hardly a single datum. Second, the necessity
of pursuing the most trivial clue to an absolute finish, as
illustrated by the spectacles. Third, the urgent need of a trained
scientist to aid the police; and, last,” he concluded, with a smile,
“we learn never to go abroad without the invaluable green case.”




A CASE OF PREMEDITATION


PART I

THE ELIMINATION OF MR. PRATT

The wine merchant who should supply a consignment of _petit vin_ to a
customer who had ordered, and paid for, a vintage wine, would render
himself subject to unambiguous comment. Nay! more; he would be liable
to certain legal penalties. And yet his conduct would be morally
indistinguishable from that of the railway company which, having
accepted a first-class fare, inflicts upon the passenger that kind of
company which he has paid to avoid. But the corporate conscience, as
Herbert Spencer was wont to explain, is an altogether inferior
product to that of the individual.

Such were the reflections of Mr. Rufus Pembury when, as the train was
about to move out of Maidstone (West) station, a coarse and burly man
(clearly a denizen of the third class) was ushered into his
compartment by the guard. He had paid the higher fare, not for
cushioned seats, but for seclusion or, at least, select
companionship. The man’s entry had deprived him of both, and he
resented it.

But if the presence of this stranger involved a breach of contract,
his conduct was a positive affront--an indignity; for, no sooner had
the train started than he fixed upon Mr. Pembury a gaze of
impertinent intensity, and continued thereafter to regard him with a
stare as steady and unwinking as that of a Polynesian idol.

It was offensive to a degree, and highly disconcerting withal. Mr.
Pembury fidgeted in his seat with increasing discomfort and rising
temper. He looked into his pocket book, read one or two letters and
sorted a collection of visiting-cards. He even thought of opening his
umbrella. Finally, his patience exhausted and his wrath mounting to
boiling-point, he turned to the stranger with frosty remonstrance.

“I imagine, sir, that you will have no difficulty in recognizing me,
should we ever meet again--which God forbid.”

“I should recognize you among ten thousand,” was the reply, so
unexpected as to leave Mr. Pembury speechless.

“You see,” the stranger continued impressively, “I’ve got the gift of
faces. I never forget.”

“That must be a great consolation,” said Pembury.

“It’s very useful to me,” said the stranger, “at least, it used to
be, when I was a warder at Portland--you remember me, I dare say: my
name is Pratt. I was assistant-warder in your time. God-forsaken
hole, Portland, and mighty glad I was when they used to send me up to
town on reckernizing duty. Holloway was the house of detention then,
you remember; that was before they moved to Brixton.”

Pratt paused in his reminiscences, and Pembury, pale and gasping with
astonishment, pulled himself together.

“I think,” said he, “you must be mistaking me for some one else.”

“I don’t,” replied Pratt. “You’re Francis Dobbs, that’s who you are.
Slipped away from Portland one evening about twelve years ago.
Clothes washed up on the Bill next day. No trace of fugitive. As neat
a mizzle as ever I heard of. But there are a couple of photographs
and a set of finger-prints at the Habitual Criminals Register.
P’r’aps you’d like to come and see ’em?”

“Why should I go to the Habitual Criminals Register?” Pembury
demanded faintly.

“Ah! Exactly. Why should you? When you are a man of means, and a
little judiciously invested capital would render it unnecessary?”

Pembury looked out of the window, and for a minute or more preserved
a stony silence. At length he turned suddenly to Pratt. “How much?”
he asked.

“I shouldn’t think a couple of hundred a year would hurt you,” was
the calm reply.

Pembury reflected awhile. “What makes you think I am a man of means?”
he asked presently.

Pratt smiled grimly. “Bless you, Mr. Pembury,” said he, “I know all
about you. Why, for the last six months I have been living within
half-a-mile of your house.”

“The devil you have!”

“Yes. When I retired from the service, General O’Gorman engaged me as
a sort of steward or caretaker of his little place at Baysford--he’s
very seldom there himself--and the very day after I came down, I met
you and spotted you, but, naturally, I kept out of sight myself.
Thought I’d find out whether you were good for anything before I
spoke, so I’ve been keeping my ears open and I find you are good for
a couple of hundred.”

There was an interval of silence, and then the ex-warder resumed--

“That’s what comes of having a memory for faces. Now there’s Jack
Ellis, on the other hand; he must have had you under his nose for a
couple of years, and yet he’s never twigged--he never will either,”
added Pratt, already regretting the confidence into which his vanity
had led him.

“Who is Jack Ellis?” Pembury demanded sharply.

“Why, he’s a sort of supernumerary at the Baysford Police Station;
does odd jobs; rural detective, helps in the office and that sort of
thing. He was in the Civil Guard at Portland, in your time, but he
got his left forefinger chopped off, so they pensioned him, and, as
he was a Baysford man, he got this billet. But he’ll never reckernize
you, don’t you fear.”

“Unless you direct his attention to me,” suggested Pembury.

“There’s no fear of that,” laughed Pratt. “You can trust me to sit
quiet on my own nest-egg. Besides, we’re not very friendly. He came
nosing round our place after the parlour maid--him a married man,
mark you! But I soon boosted him out, I can tell you; and Jack Ellis
don’t like me now.”

“I see,” said Pembury reflectively; then, after a pause, he asked:
“Who is this General O’Gorman? I seem to know the name.”

“I expect you do,” said Pratt. “He was governor of Dartmoor when I
was there--that was my last billet--and, let me tell you, if he’d
been at Portland in your time, you’d never have got away.”

“How is that?”

“Why, you see, the general is a great man on bloodhounds. He kept a
pack at Dartmoor and, you bet, those lags knew it. There were no
attempted escapes in those days. They wouldn’t have had a chance.”

“He has the pack still, hasn’t he?” asked Pembury.

“Rather. Spends any amount of time on training ’em, too. He’s always
hoping there’ll be a burglary or a murder in the neighbourhood so as
he can try ’em, but he’s never got a chance yet. P’r’aps the crooks
have heard about ’em. But, to come back to our little arrangement:
what do you say to a couple of hundred, paid quarterly, if you like?”

“I can’t settle the matter off-hand,” said Pembury. “You must give me
time to think it over.”

“Very well,” said Pratt. “I shall be back at Baysford to-morrow
evening. That will give you a clear day to think it over. Shall I
look in at your place to-morrow night?”

“No,” replied Pembury; “you’d better not be seen at my house, nor I
at yours. If I meet you at some quiet spot, where we shan’t be seen,
we can settle our business without any one knowing that we have met.
It won’t take long, and we can’t be too careful.”

“That’s true,” agreed Pratt. “Well, I’ll tell you what. There’s an
avenue leading up to our house; you know it, I expect. There’s no
lodge, and the gates are always ajar, excepting at night. Now I shall
be down by the six-thirty at Baysford. Our place is a quarter of an
hour from the station. Say you meet me in the avenue at a quarter to
seven.”

“That will suit me,” said Pembury; “that is, if you are sure the
bloodhounds won’t be straying about the grounds.”

“Lord bless you, no!” laughed Pratt. “D’you suppose the general lets
his precious hounds stray about for any casual crook to feed with
poisoned sausage? No, they’re locked up safe in the kennels at the
back of the house. Hallo! This’ll be Swanley, I expect. I’ll change
into a smoker here and leave you time to turn the matter over in your
mind. So long. To-morrow evening in the avenue at a quarter to seven.
And, I say, Mr. Pembury, you might as well bring the first instalment
with you--fifty, in small notes or gold.”

“Very well,” said Mr. Pembury. He spoke coldly enough, but there was
a flush on his cheeks and an angry light in his eyes, which, perhaps,
the ex-warder noticed; for when he had stepped out and shut the door,
he thrust his head in at the window and said threateningly--

“One more word, Mr. Pembury-Dobbs: no hanky-panky, you know. I’m an
old hand and pretty fly, I am. So don’t you try any chickery-pokery
on me. That’s all.” He withdrew his head and disappeared, leaving
Pembury to his reflections.

The nature of those reflections, if some telepathist--transferring
his attention for the moment from hidden court-yards or missing
thimbles to more practical matters--could have conveyed them into the
mind of Mr. Pratt, would have caused that quondam official some
surprise and, perhaps, a little disquiet. For long experience of the
criminal, as he appears when in durance, had produced some rather
misleading ideas as to his behaviour when at large. In fact, the
ex-warder had considerably under-estimated the ex-convict.

Rufus Pembury, to give his real name--for Dobbs was literally a _nom
de guerre_--was a man of strong character and intelligence. So much
so that, having tried the criminal career and found it not worth
pursuing, he had definitely abandoned it. When the cattle-boat that
picked him up off Portland Bill had landed him at an American port,
he brought his entire ability and energy to bear on legitimate
commercial pursuits, and with such success that, at the end of ten
years, he was able to return to England with a moderate competence.
Then he had taken a modest house near the little town of Baysford,
where he had lived quietly on his savings for the last two years,
holding aloof without much difficulty from the rather exclusive local
society; and here he might have lived out the rest of his life in
peace but for the unlucky chance that brought the man Pratt into the
neighbourhood. With the arrival of Pratt his security was utterly
destroyed.

There is something eminently unsatisfactory about a blackmailer. No
arrangement with him has any permanent validity. No undertaking that
he gives is binding. The thing which he has sold remains in his
possession to sell over again. He pockets the price of emancipation,
but retains the key of the fetters. In short, the blackmailer is a
totally impossible person.

Such were the considerations that had passed through the mind of
Rufus Pembury, even while Pratt was making his proposals; and those
proposals he had never for an instant entertained. The ex-warder’s
advice to him to “turn the matter over in his mind” was unnecessary.
For his mind was already made up. His decision was arrived at in the
very moment when Pratt had disclosed his identity. The conclusion was
self-evident. Before Pratt appeared he was living in peace and
security. While Pratt remained, his liberty was precarious from
moment to moment. If Pratt should disappear, his peace and security
would return. Therefore Pratt must be eliminated.

It was a logical consequence.

The profound meditations, therefore, in which Pembury remained
immersed for the remainder of the journey, had nothing whatever to do
with the quarterly allowance; they were concerned exclusively with
the elimination of ex-warder Pratt.

Now Rufus Pembury was not a ferocious man. He was not even cruel. But
he was gifted with a certain magnanimous cynicism which ignored the
trivialities of sentiment and regarded only the main issues. If a
wasp hummed over his tea-cup, he would crush that wasp; but not with
his bare hand. The wasp carried the means of aggression. That was the
wasp’s look-out. _His_ concern was to avoid being stung.

So it was with Pratt. The man had elected, for his own profit, to
threaten Pembury’s liberty. Very well. He had done it at his own
risk. That risk was no concern of Pembury’s. _His_ concern was his
own safety.

When Pembury alighted at Charing Cross, he directed his steps (after
having watched Pratt’s departure from the station) to Buckingham
Street, Strand, where he entered a quiet private hotel. He was
apparently expected, for the manageress greeted him by his name as
she handed him his key.

“Are you staying in town, Mr. Pembury?” she asked.

“No,” was the reply. “I go back tomorrow morning, but I may be coming
up again shortly. By the way, you used to have an encyclopaedia in
one of the rooms. Could I see it for a moment?”

“It is in the drawing-room,” said the manageress. “Shall I show
you?--but you know the way, don’t you?”

Certainly Mr. Pembury knew the way. It was on the first floor; a
pleasant old-world room looking on the quiet old street; and on a
shelf, amidst a collection of novels, stood the sedate volumes of
_Chambers’s Encyclopædia_.

That a gentleman from the country should desire to look up the
subject of “hounds” would not, to a casual observer, have seemed
unnatural. But when from hounds the student proceeded to the article
on blood, and thence to one devoted to perfumes, the observer might
reasonably have felt some surprise; and this surprise might have been
augmented if he had followed Mr. Pembury’s subsequent proceedings,
and specially if he had considered them as the actions of a man whose
immediate aim was the removal of a superfluous unit of the population.

Having deposited his bag and umbrella in his room, Pembury set forth
from the hotel as one with a definite purpose; and his footsteps led,
in the first place, to an umbrella shop on the Strand, where he
selected a thick rattan cane. There was nothing remarkable in this,
perhaps; but the cane was of an uncomely thickness and the salesman
protested. “I like a thick cane,” said Pembury.

“Yes, sir; but for a gentleman of your height” (Pembury was a small,
slightly-built man) “I would venture to suggest----”

“I like a thick cane,” repeated Pembury. “Cut it down to the proper
length and don’t rivet the ferrule on. I’ll cement it on when I get
home.”

His next investment would have seemed more to the purpose, though
suggestive of unexpected crudity of method. It was a large Norwegian
knife. But not content with this he went on forthwith to a second
cutler’s and purchased a second knife, the exact duplicate of the
first. Now, for what purpose could he want two identically similar
knives? And why not have bought them both at the same shop? It was
highly mysterious.

Shopping appeared to be a positive mania with Rufus Pembury. In the
course of the next half-hour he acquired a cheap handbag, an artist’s
black-japanned brush-case, a three-cornered file, a stick of elastic
glue and a pair of iron crucible-tongs. Still insatiable, he repaired
to an old-fashioned chemist’s shop in a by-street, where he further
enriched himself with a packet of absorbent cotton-wool and an ounce
of permanganate of potash; and, as the chemist wrapped up these
articles, with the occult and necromantic air peculiar to chemists,
Pembury watched him impassively.

“I suppose you don’t keep musk?” he asked carelessly.

The chemist paused in the act of heating a stick of sealing wax, and
appeared as if about to mutter an incantation. But he merely replied:
“No, sir. Not the solid musk; it’s so very costly. But I have the
essence.”

“That isn’t as strong as the pure stuff, I suppose?”

“No,” replied the chemist, with a cryptic smile, “not so strong, but
strong enough. These animal perfumes are so very penetrating, you
know; and so lasting. Why, I venture to say that if you were to
sprinkle a table-spoonful of the essence in the middle of St. Paul’s,
the place would smell of it six months hence.”

“You don’t say so!” said Pembury. “Well, that ought to be enough for
anybody. I’ll take a small quantity, please, and, for goodness’ sake,
see that there isn’t any on the outside of the bottle. The stuff
isn’t for myself, and I don’t want to go about smelling like a civet
cat.”

“Naturally you don’t, sir,” agreed the chemist. He then produced an
ounce bottle, a small glass funnel and a stoppered bottle labelled
“Ess. Moschi,” with which he proceeded to perform a few trifling
feats of legerdemain.

“There, sir,” said he, when he had finished the performance, “there
is not a drop on the outside of the bottle, and, if I fit it with a
rubber cork, you will be quite secure.”

Pembury’s dislike of musk appeared to be excessive, for, when the
chemist had retired into a secret cubicle as if to hold converse with
some familiar spirit (but actually to change half-a-crown), he took
the brush-case from his bag, pulled off its lid, and then, with the
crucible-tongs, daintily lifted the bottle off the counter, slid it
softly into the brush case, and, replacing the lid, returned the case
and tongs to the bag. The other two packets he took from the counter
and dropped into his pocket, and, when the presiding wizard, having
miraculously transformed a single half-crown into four pennies,
handed him the product, he left the shop and walked thoughtfully back
towards the Strand. Suddenly a new idea seemed to strike him. He
halted, considered for a few moments and then strode away northward
to make the oddest of all his purchases.

The transaction took place in a shop in the Seven Dials, whose
strange stock-in-trade ranged the whole zoological gamut, from
water-snails to Angora cats. Pembury looked at a cage of guinea-pigs
in the window and entered the shop.

“Do you happen to have a dead guinea-pig?” he asked.

“No; mine are all alive,” replied the man, adding, with a sinister
grin: “But they’re not immortal, you know.”

Pembury looked at the man distastefully. There is an appreciable
difference between a guinea-pig and a blackmailer. “Any small mammal
would do,” he said.

“There’s a dead rat in that cage, if he’s any good,” said the man.
“Died this morning, so he’s quite fresh.”

“I’ll take the rat,” said Pembury; “he’ll do quite well.”

The little corpse was accordingly made into a parcel and deposited in
the bag, and Pembury, having tendered a complimentary fee, made his
way back to the hotel.

After a modest lunch he went forth and spent the remainder of the day
transacting the business which had originally brought him to town. He
dined at a restaurant and did not return to his hotel until ten
o’clock, when he took his key, and tucking under his arm a parcel
that he had brought in with him, retired for the night. But before
undressing--and after locking his door--he did a very strange and
unaccountable thing. Having pulled off the loose ferrule from his
newly-purchased cane, he bored a hole in the bottom of it with the
spike end of the file. Then, using the latter as a broach, he
enlarged the hole until only a narrow rim of the bottom was left. He
next rolled up a small ball of cotton-wool and pushed it into the
ferrule; and having smeared the end of the cane with elastic glue, he
replaced the ferrule, warming it over the gas to make the glue stick.

When he had finished with the cane, he turned his attention to one of
the Norwegian knives. First, he carefully removed with the file most
of the bright, yellow varnish from the wooden case or handle.

Then he opened the knife, and, cutting the string of the parcel that
he had brought in, took from it the dead rat which he had bought at
the zoologist’s. Laying the animal on a sheet of paper, he cut off
its head, and, holding it up by the tail, allowed the blood that
oozed from the neck to drop on the knife, spreading it over both
sides of the blade and handle with his finger.

Then he laid the knife on the paper and softly opened the window.
From the darkness below came the voice of a cat, apparently
perfecting itself in the execution of chromatic Scales; and in that
direction Pembury flung the body and head of the rat, and closed the
window. Finally, having washed his hands and stuffed the paper from
the parcel into the fire-place, he went to bed.

But his proceedings in the morning were equally mysterious. Having
breakfasted betimes, he returned to his bedroom and locked himself
in. Then he tied his new cane, handle downwards, to the leg of the
dressing-table. Next, with the crucible-tongs, he drew the little
bottle of musk from the brush-case, and, having assured himself, by
sniffing at it, that the exterior was really free from odour, he with
drew the rubber cork. Then, slowly and with infinite care, he poured
a few drops--perhaps half-a-teaspoonful--of the essence on the
cotton-wool that bulged through the hole in the ferrule, watching the
absorbent material narrowly as it soaked up the liquid. When it was
saturated he proceeded to treat the knife in the same fashion,
letting fall a drop of the essence on the wooden handle--which soaked
it up readily. This done, he slid up the window and looked out.
Immediately below was a tiny yard in which grew, or rather survived,
a couple of faded laurel bushes. The body of the rat was nowhere to
be seen; it had apparently been spirited away in the night. Holding
out the bottle, which he still held, he dropped it into the bushes,
flinging the rubber cork after it.

His next proceeding was to take a tube of vaseline from his
dressing-bag and squeeze a small quantity onto his fingers. With this
he thoroughly smeared the shoulder of the brush case and the inside
of the lid, so as to ensure an airtight joint. Having wiped his
fingers, he picked the knife up with the crucible-tongs, and,
dropping it into the brush-case, immediately pushed on the lid. Then
he heated the tips of the tongs in the gas flame to destroy the
scent, packed the tongs and brush-case in the bag, untied the
cane--carefully avoiding contact with the ferrule--and, taking up the
two bags, went out, holding the cane by its middle.

There was no difficulty in finding an empty compartment, for
first-class passengers were few at that time in the morning. Pembury
waited on the platform until the guard’s whistle sounded, when he
stepped into the compartment, shut the door and laid the cane on the
seat with its ferrule projecting out of the off-side window, in which
position it remained until the train drew up in Baysford station.

Pembury left his dressing-bag at the cloak-room, and, still grasping
the cane by its middle, he sallied forth. The town of Baysford lay
some half-a-mile to the east of the station; his own house was a mile
along the road to the west; and half-way between his house and the
station was the residence of General O’Gorman. He knew the place
well. Originally a farmhouse, it stood on the edge of a great expanse
of flat meadows and communicated with the road by an avenue, nearly
three hundred yards long, of ancient trees. The avenue was shut off
from the road by a pair of iron gates, but these were merely
ornamental, for the place was unenclosed and accessible from the
surrounding meadows--indeed, an indistinct footpath crossed the
meadows and intersected the avenue about half-way up.

On this occasion Pembury, whose objective was the avenue, elected to
approach it by the latter route; and at each stile or fence that he
surmounted, he paused to survey the country. Presently the avenue
arose before him, lying athwart the narrow track, and, as he entered
it between two of the trees, he halted and looked about him.

He stood listening for a while. Beyond the faint rustle of leaves no
sound was to be heard. Evidently there was no one about, and, as
Pratt was at large, it was probable that the general was absent.

And now Pembury began to examine the adjacent trees with more than a
casual interest. The two between which he had entered were
respectively an elm and a great pollard oak, the latter being an
immense tree whose huge, warty bole divided about seven feet from the
ground into three limbs, each as large as a fair-sized tree, of which
the largest swept outward in a great curve half-way across the
avenue. On this patriarch Pembury bestowed especial attention,
walking completely round it and finally laying down his bag and cane
(the latter resting on the bag with the ferrule off the ground) that
he might climb up, by the aid of the warty outgrowths, to examine the
crown; and he had just stepped up into the space between the three
limbs, when the creaking of the iron gates was followed by a quick
step in the avenue. Hastily he let himself down from the tree, and,
gathering up his possessions, stood close behind the great bole.

“Just as well not to be seen,” was his reflection, as he hugged the
tree closely and waited, peering cautiously round the trunk. Soon a
streak of moving shadow heralded the stranger’s approach, and he
moved round to keep the trunk between himself and the intruder. On
the footsteps came, until the stranger was abreast of the tree; and
when he had passed Pembury peeped round at the retreating figure. It
was only the postman, but then the man knew him, and he was glad he
had kept out of sight.

Apparently the oak did not meet his requirements, for he stepped out
and looked up and down the avenue. Then, beyond the elm, he caught
sight of an ancient pollard hornbeam--a strange, fantastic tree whose
trunk widened out trumpet-like above into a broad crown, from the
edge of which multitudinous branches uprose like the limbs of some
weird hamadryad.

That tree he approved at a glance, but he lingered behind the oak
until the postman, returning with brisk step and cheerful whistle,
passed down the avenue and left him once more in solitude. Then he
moved on with a resolute air to the hornbeam.

The crown of the trunk was barely six feet from the ground. He could
reach it easily, as he found on trying. Standing the cane against the
tree--ferrule downwards, this time--he took the brush-case from the
bag, pulled off the lid, and, with the crucible-tongs, lifted out the
knife and laid it on the crown of the tree, just out of sight,
leaving the tongs--also invisible--still grasping the knife. He was
about to replace the brush-case in the bag, when he appeared to alter
his mind. Sniffing at it, and finding it reeking with the sickly
perfume, he pushed the lid on again and threw the case up into the
tree, where he heard it roll down into the central hollow of the
crown. Then he closed the bag, and, taking the cane by its handle,
moved slowly away in the direction whence he had come, passing out of
the avenue between the elm and the oak.

His mode of progress was certainly peculiar. He walked with excessive
slowness, trailing the cane along the ground, and every few paces he
would stop and press the ferrule firmly against the earth, so that,
to any one who should have observed him, he would have appeared to be
wrapped in an absorbing reverie.

Thus he moved on across the fields, not, however, returning to the
high road, but crossing another stretch of fields until he emerged
into a narrow lane that led out into the High Street. Immediately
opposite to the lane was the police station, distinguished from the
adjacent cottages only by its lamp, its open door and the notices
pasted up outside. Straight across the road Pembury walked, still
trailing the cane, and halted at the station door to read the
notices, resting his cane on the doorstep as he did so. Through the
open doorway he could see a man writing at a desk. The man’s back was
towards him, but, presently, a movement brought his left hand into
view, and Pembury noted that the forefinger was missing. This, then,
was Jack Ellis, late of the Civil Guard at Portland.

Even while he was looking the man turned his head, and Pembury
recognized him at once. He had frequently met him on the road between
Baysford and the adjoining village of Thorpe, and always at the same
time. Apparently Ellis paid a daily visit to Thorpe--perhaps to
receive a report from the rural constable--and he started between
three and four and returned between seven and a quarter past.

Pembury looked at his watch. It was a quarter past three. He moved
away thoughtfully (holding his cane, now, by the middle), and began
to walk slowly in the direction of Thorpe--westward.

For a while he was deeply meditative, and his face wore a puzzled
frown. Then, suddenly, his face cleared and he strode forward at a
brisker pace. Presently he passed through a gap in the hedge, and,
walking in a field parallel with the road, took out his purse--a
small pigskin pouch. Having frugally emptied it of its contents,
excepting a few shillings, he thrust the ferrule of his cane into the
small compartment ordinarily reserved for gold or notes.

And thus he continued to walk on slowly, carrying the cane by the
middle and the purse jammed on the end.

At length he reached a sharp double curve in the road whence he could
see back for a considerable distance; and here opposite a small
opening, he sat down to wait. The hedge screened him effectually from
the gaze of passers-by--though these were few enough--without
interfering with his view.

A quarter of an hour passed. He began to be uneasy. Had he been
mistaken? Were Ellis’s visits only occasional instead of daily, as he
had thought? That would be tiresome though not actually disastrous.
But at this point in his reflections a figure came into view,
advancing along the road with a steady swing. He recognized the
figure. It was Ellis.

But there was another figure advancing from the opposite direction: a
labourer, apparently. He prepared to shift his ground, but another
glance showed him that the labourer would pass first. He waited. The
labourer came on and, at length, passed the opening, and, as he did
so, Ellis disappeared for a moment in a bend of the road. Instantly
Pembury passed his cane through the opening in the hedge, shook off
the purse and pushed it into the middle of the foot way. Then he
crept forward, behind the hedge, towards the approaching official,
and again sat down to wait. On came the steady tramp of the
unconscious Ellis, and, as it passed, Pembury drew aside an
obstructing branch and peered out at the retreating figure. The
question now was, would Ellis see the purse? It was not a very
conspicuous object.

The footsteps stopped abruptly. Looking out, Pembury saw the police
official stoop, pick up the purse, examine its contents and finally
stow it in his trousers pocket. Pembury heaved a sigh of relief; and,
as the dwindling figure passed out of sight round a curve in the
road, he rose, stretched himself and strode away briskly.

Near the gap was a group of ricks, and, as he passed them, a fresh
idea suggested itself. Looking round quickly he passed to the farther
side of one and, thrusting his cane deeply into it, pushed it home
with a piece of stick that he picked up near the rick, until the
handle was lost among the straw. The bag was now all that was left,
and it was empty--for his other purchases were in the dressing-bag,
which, by the way, he must fetch from the station. He opened it and
smelt the interior, but, though he could detect no odour, he resolved
to be rid of it if possible.

As he emerged from the gap a wagon jogged slowly past. It was piled
high with sacks, and the tail-board was down. Stepping into the road,
he quickly overtook the wagon, and, having glanced round, laid the
bag lightly on the tail-board. Then he set off for the station.

On arriving home he went straight up to his bedroom, and, ringing for
his housekeeper, ordered a substantial meal. Then he took off his
clothes and deposited them, even to his shirt, socks and necktie, in
a trunk, wherein his summer clothing was stored with a plentiful
sprinkling of naphthol to preserve it from the moth. Taking the
packet of permanganate of potash from his dressing-bag, he passed
into the adjoining bathroom, and, tipping the crystals into the bath,
turned on the water. Soon the bath was filled with a pink solution of
the salt, and into this he plunged, immersing his entire body and
thoroughly soaking his hair. Then he emptied the bath and rinsed
himself in clear water, and, having dried himself, returned to the
bedroom and dressed himself in fresh clothing. Finally he took a
hearty meal, and then lay down on the sofa to rest until it should be
time to start for the rendezvous.

Half-past six found him lurking in the shadow by the
station-approach, within sight of the solitary lamp. He heard the
train come in, saw the stream of passengers emerge, and noted one
figure detach itself from the throng and turn on to the Thorpe road.
It was Pratt, as the lamp light showed him; Pratt, striding forward
to the meeting-place with an air of jaunty satisfaction and an
uncommonly creaky pair of boots.

Pembury followed him at a safe distance, and rather by sound than
sight, until he was well past the stile at the entrance to the
footpath. Evidently he was going on to the gates. Then Pembury
vaulted over the stile and strode away swiftly across the dark
meadows.

When he plunged into the deep gloom of the avenue, his first act was
to grope his way to the hornbeam and slip his hand up onto the crown
and satisfy himself that the tongs were as he had left them.
Reassured by the touch of his fingers on the iron loops, he turned
and walked slowly down the avenue. The duplicate knife--ready
opened--was in his left inside breast-pocket, and he fingered its
handle as he walked.

Presently the iron gate squeaked mournfully, and then the rhythmical
creak of a pair of boots was audible, coming up the avenue. Pembury
walked forward slowly until a darker smear emerged from the
surrounding gloom, when he called out----

“Is that you, Pratt?”

“That’s me,” was the cheerful, if ungrammatical response, and, as he
drew nearer, the ex-warder asked: “Have you brought the rhino, old
man?”

The insolent familiarity of the man’s tone was agreeable to Pembury:
it strengthened his nerve and hardened his heart. “Of course,” he
replied; “but we must have a definite understanding, you know.”

“Look here,” said Pratt, “I’ve got no time for jaw. The General will
be here presently; he’s riding over from Bingfield with a friend. You
hand over the dibs and we’ll talk some other time.”

“That is all very well,” said Pembury, “but you must understand----”
He paused abruptly and stood still. They were now close to the
hornbeam, and, as he stood, he stared up into the dark mass of
foliage.

“What’s the matter?” demanded Pratt. “What are you staring at?” He,
too, had halted and stood gazing intently into the darkness.

Then, in an instant, Pembury whipped out the knife and drove it, with
all his strength, into the broad back of the ex-warder, below the
left shoulder-blade.

With a hideous yell Pratt turned and grappled with his assailant. A
powerful man and a competent wrestler, too, he was far more than a
match for Pembury unarmed, and, in a moment, he had him by the
throat. But Pembury clung to him tightly, and, as they trampled to
and fro and round and round, he stabbed again and again with the
viciousness of a Scorpion, while Pratt’s cries grew more gurgling and
husky. Then they fell heavily to the ground, Pembury underneath. But
the struggle was over. With a last bubbling groan, Pratt relaxed his
hold and in a moment grew limp and inert. Pembury pushed him off and
rose, trembling and breathing heavily.

But he wasted no time. There had been more noise than he had
bargained for. Quickly stepping up to the hornbeam, he reached up for
the tongs. His fingers slid into the looped handles; the tongs
grasped the knife, and he lifted it out from its hiding-place and
carried it to where the corpse lay, depositing it on the ground a few
feet from the body. Then he went back to the tree and carefully
pushed the tongs over into the hollow of the crown.

At this moment a woman’s voice sounded shrilly from the top of the
avenue.

“Is that you, Mr. Pratt?” it called.

Pembury started and then stepped back quickly, on tiptoe, to the
body. For there was the duplicate knife. He must take that away at
all costs.

The corpse was lying on its back. The knife was underneath it, driven
in to the very haft. He had to use both hands to lift the body, and
even then he had some difficulty in disengaging the weapon. And,
meanwhile, the voice, repeating its question, drew nearer.

At length he succeeded in drawing out the knife and thrust it into
his breast-pocket. The corpse fell back, and he stood up gasping.

“Mr. Pratt! Are you there?” The nearness of the voice startled
Pembury, and, turning sharply, he saw a light twinkling between the
trees. And then the gates creaked loudly and he heard the crunch of a
horse’s hoofs on the gravel.

He stood for an instant bewildered--utterly taken by surprise. He had
not reckoned on a horse. His intended flight across the meadows
towards Thorpe was now impracticable. If he were overtaken he was
lost, for he knew there was blood on his clothes and his hands were
wet and slippery--to say nothing of the knife in his pocket.

But his confusion lasted only for an instant. He remembered the oak
tree; and, turning out of the avenue, he ran to it, and, touching it
as little as he could with his bloody hands, climbed quickly up into
the crown. The great horizontal limb was nearly three feet in
diameter, and, as he lay out on it, gathering his coat closely round
him, he was quite invisible from below.

He had hardly settled himself when the light which he had seen came
into full view, revealing a woman advancing with a stable lantern in
her hand. And, almost at the same moment, a streak of brighter light
burst from the opposite direction. The horseman was accompanied by a
man on a bicycle.

The two men came on apace, and the horseman, sighting the woman,
called out: “Anything the matter, Mrs. Parton?” But, at that moment,
the light of the bicycle lamp fell full on the prostrate corpse. The
two men uttered a simultaneous cry of horror; the woman shrieked
aloud: and then the horseman sprang from the saddle and ran forward
to the body.

“Why,” he exclaimed, stooping over it, “it’s Pratt;” and, as the
cyclist came up and the glare of his lamp shone on a great pool of
blood, he added: “There’s been foul play here, Hanford.”

Hanford flashed his lamp around the body, lighting up the ground for
several yards.

“What is that behind you, O’Gorman?” he said suddenly; “isn’t it a
knife?” He was moving quickly towards it when O’Gorman held up his
hand.

“Don’t touch it!” he exclaimed. “We’ll put the hounds onto it.
They’ll soon track the scoundrel, whoever he is. By God! Hanford,
this fellow has fairly delivered himself into our hands.” He stood
for a few moments looking down at the knife with something uncommonly
like exultation, and then, turning quickly to his friend, said: “Look
here, Hanford; you ride off to the police station as hard as you can
pelt. It is only three-quarters of a mile; you’ll do it in five
minutes. Send or bring an officer and I’ll scour the meadows
meanwhile. If I haven’t got the scoundrel when you come back, we’ll
put the hounds onto this knife and run the beggar down.”

“Right,” replied Hanford, and without another word he wheeled his
machine about, mounted and rode away into the darkness.

“Mrs. Parton,” said O’Gorman, “watch that knife. See that nobody
touches it while I go and examine the meadows.”

“Is Mr. Pratt dead, sir?” whimpered Mrs. Parton.

“Gad! I hadn’t thought of that,” said the general. “You’d better have
a look at him; but mind! nobody is to touch that knife or they will
confuse the scent.”

He scrambled into the saddle and galloped away across the meadows in
the direction of Thorpe; and, as Pembury listened to the diminuendo
of the horse’s hoofs, he was glad that he had not attempted to
escape; for that was the direction in which he had meant to go, and
he would surely have been overtaken.

As soon as the general was gone, Mrs. Parton, with many a
terror-stricken glance over her shoulder, approached the corpse and
held the lantern close to the dead face. Suddenly she stood up,
trembling violently, for footsteps were audible coming down the
avenue. A familiar voice reassured her.

“Is anything wrong, Mrs. Parton?” The question proceeded from one of
the maids who had come in search of the elder woman, escorted by a
young man, and the pair now came out into the circle of light.

“Good God!” ejaculated the man. “Who’s that?”

“It’s Mr. Pratt,” replied Mrs. Parton. “He’s been murdered.”

The girl screamed, and then the two domestics approached on tiptoe,
staring at the corpse with the fascination of horror.

“Don’t touch that knife,” said Mrs. Parton, for the man was about to
pick it up. “The general’s going to put the bloodhounds onto it.”

“Is the general here, then?” asked the man; and, as he spoke, the
drumming of hoofs, growing momentarily louder, answered him from the
meadow.

O’Gorman reined in his horse as he perceived the group of servants
gathered about the corpse. “Is he dead, Mrs. Parton?” he asked.

“I am afraid so, sir,” was the reply.

“Ha! Somebody ought to go for the doctor; but not you, Bailey. I want
you to get the hounds ready and wait with them at the top of the
avenue until I call you.”

He was off again into the Baysford meadows, and Bailey hurried away,
leaving the two women staring at the body and talking in whispers.

Pembury’s position was cramped and uncomfortable. He dared not move,
hardly dared to breathe, for the women below him were not a dozen
yards away; and it was with mingled feelings of relief and
apprehension that he presently saw from his elevated station a group
of lights approaching rapidly along the road from Baysford. Presently
they were hidden by the trees, and then, after a brief interval, the
whirr of wheels sounded on the drive and streaks of light on the
tree-trunks announced the new arrivals. There were three bicycles,
ridden respectively by Mr. Hanford, a police inspector and a
sergeant; and, as they drew up, the general came thundering back into
the avenue.

“Is Ellis with you?” he asked, as he pulled up.

“No, sir,” was the reply. “He hadn’t come in from Thorpe when we
left. He’s rather late to-night.”

“Have you sent for a doctor?”

“Yes, sir, I’ve sent for Dr. Hills,” said the inspector, resting his
bicycle against the oak. Pembury could smell the reek of the lamp as
he crouched. “Is Pratt dead?”

“Seems to be,” replied O’Gorman, “but we’d better leave that to the
doctor. There’s the murderer’s knife. Nobody has touched it. I’m
going to fetch the bloodhounds now.”

“Ah! that’s the thing,” said the inspector. “The man can’t be far
away.” He rubbed his hands with a satisfied air as O’Gorman cantered
away up the avenue.

In less than a minute there came out from the darkness the deep
baying of a hound followed by quick footsteps on the gravel. Then
into the circle of light emerged three sinister shapes, loose-limbed
and gaunt, and two men advancing at a shambling trot.

“Here, inspector,” shouted the general, “you take one; I can’t hold
‘em both.”

The inspector ran forward and seized one of the leashes, and the
general led his hound up to the knife, as it lay on the ground.
Pembury, peering cautiously round the bough, watched the great brute
with almost impersonal curiosity; noted its high poll, its wrinkled
forehead and melancholy face as it stooped to snuff suspiciously at
the prostrate knife.

For some moments the hound stood motionless, sniffing at the knife;
then it turned away and walked to and fro with its muzzle to the
ground. Suddenly it lifted its head, bayed loudly, lowered its muzzle
and started forward between the oak and the elm, dragging the general
after it at a run.

The inspector next brought his hound to the knife, and was soon
bounding away to the tug of the leash in the general’s wake.

“They don’t make no mistakes, they don’t,” said Bailey, addressing
the gratified sergeant, as he brought forward the third hound;
“you’ll see--” But his remark was cut short by a violent jerk of the
leash, and the next moment he was flying after the others, followed
by Mr. Hanford.

The sergeant daintily picked the knife up by its ring, wrapped it in
his handkerchief and bestowed it in his pocket. Then he ran off after
the hounds.

Pembury smiled grimly. His scheme was working out admirably in spite
of the unforeseen difficulties. If those confounded women would only
go away, he could come down and take himself off while the course was
clear. He listened to the baying of the hounds, gradually growing
fainter in the increasing distance, and cursed the dilatoriness of
the doctor. Confound the fellow! Didn’t he realize that this was a
case of life or death?

Suddenly his ear caught the tinkle of a bicycle bell; a fresh light
appeared coming up the avenue and then a bicycle swept up swiftly to
the scene of the tragedy, and a small elderly man jumped down by the
side of the body. Giving his machine to Mrs. Parton, he stooped over
the dead man, felt the wrist, pushed back an eyelid, held a match to
the eye and then rose. “This is a shocking affair, Mrs. Parton,” said
he. “The poor fellow is quite dead. You had better help me to carry
him to the house. If you two take the feet I will take the shoulders.”

Pembury watched them raise the body and stagger away with it up the
avenue. He heard their shuffling steps die away and the door of the
house shut. And still he listened. From far away in the meadows came,
at intervals, the baying of the hounds. Other sounds there was none.
Presently the doctor would come back for his bicycle, but, for the
moment, the coast was clear. Pembury rose stiffly. His hands had
stuck to the tree where they had pressed against it, and they were
still sticky and damp. Quickly he let himself down to the ground,
listened again for a moment, and then, making a small circuit to
avoid the lamplight, softly crossed the avenue and stole away across
the Thorpe meadows.

The night was intensely dark, and not a soul was stirring in the
meadows. He strode forward quickly, peering into the darkness and
stopping now and again to listen; but no sound came to his ears, save
the now faint baying of the distant hounds. Not far from his house,
he remembered, was a deep ditch spanned by a wooden bridge, and
towards this he now made his way; for he knew that his appearance was
such as to convict him at a glance. Arrived at the ditch, he stooped
to wash his hands and wrists; and, as he bent forward, the knife fell
from his breast-pocket into the shallow water at the margin. He
groped for it, and, having found it, drove it deep into the mud as
far out as he could reach. Then he wiped his hands on some
water-weed, crossed the bridge and started homewards.

He approached his house from the rear, satisfied himself that his
housekeeper was in the kitchen, and, letting himself in very quietly
with his key, went quickly up to his bedroom. Here he washed
thoroughly--in the bath, so that he could get rid of the discoloured
water--changed his clothes and packed those that he took off in a
portmanteau.

By the time he had done this the gong sounded for supper. As he took
his seat at the table, spruce and fresh in appearance, quietly
cheerful in manner, he addressed his house keeper. “I wasn’t able to
finish my business in London,” he said. “I shall have to go up again
tomorrow.”

“Shall you come home the same day?” asked the housekeeper.

“Perhaps,” was the reply, “and perhaps not. It will depend on
circumstances.”

He did not say what the circumstances might be, nor did the
housekeeper ask. Mr. Pembury was not addicted to confidences. He was
an eminently discreet man: and discreet men say little.


PART II

RIVAL SLEUTH-HOUNDS

(_Related by Christopher Jervis, M.D._)

The half-hour that follows breakfast, when the fire has, so to speak,
got into its stride, and the morning pipe throws up its clouds of
incense, is, perhaps, the most agreeable in the whole day. Especially
so when a sombre sky, brooding over the town, hints at streets
pervaded by the chilly morning air, and hoots from protesting tugs
upon the river tell of lingering mists, the legacy of the
lately-vanished night.

The autumn morning was raw: the fire burned jovially. I thrust my
slippered feet towards the blaze and meditated, on nothing in
particular, with catlike enjoyment. Presently a disapproving grunt
from Thorndyke attracted my attention, and I looked round lazily. He
was extracting, with a pair of office shears, the readable portions
of the morning paper, and had paused with a small cutting between his
finger and thumb. “Bloodhounds again,” said he. “We shall be hearing
presently of the revival of the ordeal by fire.”

“And a deuced comfortable ordeal, too, on a morning like this,” I
said, stroking my legs ecstatically. “What is the case?”

He was about to reply when a sharp rat-tat from the little brass
knocker announced a disturber of our peace. Thorndyke stepped over to
the door and admitted a police inspector in uniform, and I stood up,
and, presenting my dorsal aspect to the fire, prepared to combine
bodily comfort with attention to business.

“I believe I am speaking to Dr. Thorndyke,” said the officer, and, as
Thorndyke nodded, he went on: “My name, sir, is Fox, Inspector Fox of
the Baysford Police. Perhaps you’ve seen the morning paper?”

Thorndyke held up the cutting, and, placing a chair by the fire,
asked the inspector if he had breakfasted.

“Thank you, sir, I have,” replied Inspector Fox. “I came up to town
by the late train last night so as to be here early, and stayed at an
hotel. You see, from the paper, that we have had to arrest one of our
own men. That’s rather awkward, you know, sir.”

“Very,” agreed Thorndyke.

“Yes; it’s bad for the force and bad for the public too. But we had
to do it. There was no way out that we could see. Still, we should
like the accused to have every chance, both for our sake and his own,
so the chief constable thought he’d like to have your opinion on the
case, and he thought that, perhaps, you might be willing to act for
the defence.”

“Let us have the particulars,” said Thorndyke, taking a writing-pad
from a drawer and dropping into his armchair. “Begin at the
beginning,” he added, “and tell us all you know.”

“Well,” said the inspector, after a preliminary cough, “to begin with
the murdered man: his name is Pratt. He was a retired prison warder,
and was employed as steward by General O’Gorman, who is a retired
prison governor--you may have heard of him in connection with his
pack of blood hounds. Well, Pratt came down from London yesterday
evening by a train arriving at Baysford at six-thirty. He was seen by
the guard, the ticket collector and the outside porter. The porter
saw him leave the station at six-thirty-seven. General O’Gorman’s
house is about half-a-mile from the station. At five minutes to seven
the general and a gentleman named Hanford and the general’s
housekeeper, a Mrs. Parton, found Pratt lying dead in the avenue that
leads up to the house. He had apparently been stabbed, for there was
a lot of blood about, and a knife--a Norwegian knife--was lying on
the ground near the body. Mrs. Parton had thought she heard some one
in the avenue calling out for help, and, as Pratt was just due, she
came out with a lantern. She met the general and Mr. Hanford, and all
three seem to have caught sight of the body at the same moment. Mr.
Hanford cycled down to us, at once, with the news; we sent for a
doctor, and I went back with Mr. Hanford and took a sergeant with me.
We arrived at twelve minutes past seven, and then the general, who
had galloped his horse over the meadows each side of the avenue
without having seen anybody, fetched out his bloodhounds and led them
up to the knife. All three hounds took up the scent at once--I held
the leash of one of them--and they took us across the meadows without
a pause or a falter, over stiles and fences, along a lane, out into
the town, and then, one after the other, they crossed the road in a
bee-line to the police station, bolted in at the door, which stood
open, and made straight for the desk, where a supernumerary officer,
named Ellis, was writing. They made a rare to-do, struggling to get
at him, and it was as much as we could manage to hold them back. As
for Ellis, he turned as pale as a ghost.”

“Was any one else in the room?” asked Thorndyke.

“Oh, yes. There were two constables and a messenger. We led the
hounds up to them, but the brutes wouldn’t take any notice of them.
They wanted Ellis.”

“And what did you do?”

“Why, we arrested Ellis, of course. Couldn’t do anything
else--especially with the general there.”

“What had the general to do with it?” asked Thorndyke.

“He’s a J.P. and a late governor of Dartmoor, and it was his hounds
that had run the man down. But we must have arrested Ellis in any
case.”

“Is there anything against the accused man?”

“Yes, there is. He and Pratt were on distinctly unfriendly terms.
They were old comrades, for Ellis was in the Civil Guard at Portland
when Pratt was warder there--he was pensioned off from the service
because he got his left forefinger chopped off--but lately they had
had some unpleasantness about a woman, a parlourmaid of the
general’s. It seems that Ellis, who is a married man, paid the girl
too much attention--or Pratt thought he did--and Pratt warned Ellis
off the premises. Since then they had not been on speaking terms.”

“And what sort of a man is Ellis?”

“A remarkably decent fellow he always seemed; quiet, steady,
good-natured; I should have said he wouldn’t have hurt a fly. We all
liked him--better than we liked Pratt, in fact; poor Pratt was what
you’d call an old soldier--sly, you know, sir--and a bit of a sneak.”

“You searched and examined Ellis, of course?”

“Yes. There was nothing suspicious about him except that he had two
purses. But he says he picked up one of them--a small, pigskin
pouch--on the footpath of the Thorpe road yesterday afternoon; and
there’s no reason to disbelieve him. At any rate, the purse was not
Pratt’s.”

Thorndyke made a note on his pad, and then asked: “There were no
bloodstains or marks on his clothing?”

“No. His clothing was not marked or disarranged in any way.”

“Any cuts, scratches or bruises on his person?”

“None whatever,” replied the inspector.

“At what time did you arrest Ellis?”

“Half-past seven exactly.”

“Have you ascertained what his movements were? Had he been near the
scene of the murder?”

“Yes; he had been to Thorpe and would pass the gates of the avenue on
his way back. And he was later than usual in returning, though not
later than he has often been before.”

“And now, as to the murdered man: has the body been examined?”

“Yes; I had Dr. Hills’s report before I left. There were no less than
seven deep knife-wounds, all on the left side of the back. There was
a great deal of blood on the ground, and Dr. Hills thinks Pratt must
have bled to death in a minute or two.”

“Do the wounds correspond with the knife that was found?”

“I asked the doctor that, and he said ‘Yes,’ though he wasn’t going
to swear to any particular knife. However, that point isn’t of much
importance. The knife was covered with blood, and it was found close
to the body.”

“What has been done with it, by the way?” asked Thorndyke.

“The sergeant who was with me picked it up and rolled it in his
handkerchief to carry in his pocket. I took it from him, just as it
was, and locked it in a dispatch-box.”

“Has the knife been recognized as Ellis’s property?”

“No, sir, it has not.”

“Were there any recognizable footprints or marks of a struggle?”
Thorndyke asked.

The inspector grinned sheepishly. “I haven’t examined the spot, of
course, sir,” said he, “but, after the general’s horse and the
bloodhounds and the general on foot and me and the gardener and the
sergeant and Mr. Hanford had been over it twice, going and returning,
why, you see, sir----

“Exactly, exactly,” said Thorndyke. “Well, inspector, I shall be
pleased to act for the defence; it seems to me that the case against
Ellis is in some respects rather inconclusive.”

The inspector was frankly amazed. “It certainly hadn’t struck me in
that light, sir,” he said.

“No? Well, that is my view; and I think the best plan will be for me
to come down with you and investigate matters on the spot.”

The inspector assented cheerfully, and, when we had provided him with
a newspaper, we withdrew to the laboratory to consult time-tables and
prepare for the expedition.

“You are coming, I suppose, Jervis?” said Thorndyke.

“If I shall be of any use,” I replied.

“Of course you will,” said he. “Two heads are better than one, and,
by the look of things, I should say that ours will be the only ones
with any sense in them. We will take the research case, of course,
and we may as well have a camera with us. I see there is a train from
Charing Cross in twenty minutes.”

For the first half-hour of the journey Thorndyke sat in his corner,
alternately conning over his notes and gazing with thoughtful eyes
out of the window. I could see that the case pleased him, and was
careful not to break in upon his train of thought. Presently,
however, he put away his notes and began to fill his pipe with a more
companionable air, and then the inspector, who had been wriggling
with impatience, opened fire.

“So you think, sir, that you see a way out for Ellis?”

“I think there is a case for the defence,” replied Thorndyke. “In
fact, I call the evidence against him rather flimsy.”

The inspector gasped. “But the knife, sir? What about the knife?”

“Well,” said Thorndyke, “what about the knife? Whose knife was it?
You don’t know. It was covered with blood. Whose blood? You don’t
know. Let us assume, for the sake of argument, that it was the
murderer’s knife. Then the blood on it was Pratt’s blood. But if it
was Pratt’s blood, when the hounds had smelt it they should have led
you to Pratt’s body, for blood gives a very strong scent. But they
did not. They ignored the body. The inference seems to be that the
blood on the knife was not Pratt’s blood.”

The inspector took off his cap and gently scratched the back of his
head. “You’re perfectly right, sir,” he said. “I’d never thought of
that. None of us had.”

“Then,” pursued Thorndyke, “let us assume that the knife was Pratt’s.
If so, it would seem to have been used in self-defence. But this was
a Norwegian knife, a clumsy tool--not a weapon at all--which takes an
appreciable time to open and requires the use of two free hands. Now,
had Pratt both hands free? Certainly not after the attack had
commenced. There were seven wounds, all on the left side of the back;
which indicates that he held the murderer locked in his arms and that
the murderer’s arms were around him. Also, incidentally, that the
murderer is right-handed. But, still, let us assume that the knife
was Pratt’s. Then the blood on it was that of the murderer. Then the
murderer must have been wounded. But Ellis was not wounded. Then
Ellis is not the murderer. The knife doesn’t help us at all.”

The inspector puffed out his cheeks and blew softly. “This is getting
out of my depth,” he said. “Still, sir, you can’t get over the
bloodhounds. They tell us distinctly that the knife is Ellis’s knife
and I don’t see any answer to that.”

“There is no answer because there has been no statement. The
bloodhounds have told you nothing. You have drawn certain inferences
from their actions, but those inferences may be totally wrong and
they are certainly not evidence.”

“You don’t seem to have much opinion of bloodhounds,” the inspector
remarked.

“As agents for the detection of crime,” replied Thorndyke, “I regard
them as useless. You cannot put a bloodhound in the witness-box. You
can get no intelligible statement from it. If it possesses any
knowledge, it has no means of communicating it. The fact is,” he
continued, “that the entire system of using bloodhounds for criminal
detection is based on a fallacy. In the American plantations these
animals were used with great success for tracking runaway slaves. But
the slave was a known individual. All that was required was to
ascertain his whereabouts. That is not the problem that is presented
in the detection of a crime. The detective is not concerned in
establishing the whereabouts of a known individual, but in
discovering the identity of an unknown individual. And for this
purpose bloodhounds are useless. They may discover such identity, but
they cannot communicate their knowledge. If the criminal is unknown
they cannot identify him: if he is known, the police have no need of
the bloodhound.

“To return to our present case,” Thorndyke resumed, after a pause;
“we have employed certain agents--the hounds--with whom we are not
_en rapport_, as the spiritualists would say; and we have no
‘medium.’ The hound possesses a special sense--the olfactory--which
in man is quite rudimentary. He thinks, so to speak, in terms of
smell, and his thoughts are untranslatable to beings in whom the
sense of smell is undeveloped. We have presented to the hound a
knife, and he discovers in it certain odorous properties; he
discovers similar or related odorous properties in a tract of land
and a human individual--Ellis. We cannot verify his discoveries or
ascertain their nature. What remains? All that we can say is that
there appears to exist some odorous relation between the knife and
the man Ellis. But until we can ascertain the nature of that
relation, we cannot estimate its evidential value or bearing. All the
other ‘evidence’ is the product of your imagination and that of the
general. There is, at present, no case against Ellis.”

“He must have been pretty close to the place when the murder
happened,” said the inspector.

“So, probably, were many other people,” answered Thorndyke; “but had
he time to wash and change? Because he would have needed it.”

“I suppose he would,” the inspector agreed dubiously.

“Undoubtedly. There were seven wounds which would have taken some
time to inflict. Now we can’t suppose that Pratt stood passively
while the other man stabbed him--indeed, as I have said, the position
of the wounds shows that he did not. There was a struggle. The two
men were locked together. One of the murderer’s hands was against
Pratt’s back; probably both hands were, one clasping and the other
stabbing. There must have been blood on one hand and probably on
both. But you say there was no blood on Ellis, and there doesn’t seem
to have been time or opportunity for him to wash.”

“Well, it’s a mysterious affair,” said the inspector; “but I don’t
see how you are going to get over the bloodhounds.”

Thorndyke shrugged his shoulders impatiently. “The bloodhounds are an
obsession,” he said. “The whole problem really centres around the
knife. The questions are, Whose knife was it? and what was the
connection between it and Ellis? There is a problem, Jervis,” he
continued, turning to me, “that I submit for your consideration. Some
of the possible solutions are exceedingly curious.”

As we set out from Baysford station, Thorndyke looked at his watch
and noted the time. “You will take us the way that Pratt went,” he
said.

“As to that,” said the inspector, “he may have gone by the road or by
the footpath; but there’s very little difference in the distance.”

Turning away from Baysford, we walked along the road westward,
towards the village of Thorpe, and presently passed on our right a
stile at the entrance to a footpath.

“That path,” said the inspector, “crosses the avenue about half-way
up. But we’d better keep to the road.” A quarter of a mile further on
we came to a pair of rusty iron gates one of which stood open, and,
entering, we found ourselves in a broad drive bordered by two rows of
trees, between the trunks of which a long stretch of pasture meadows
could be seen on either hand. It was a fine avenue, and, late in the
year as it was, the yellowing foliage clustered thickly overhead.

When we had walked about a hundred and fifty yards from the gates,
the inspector halted.

“This is the place,” he said; and Thorndyke again noted the time.

“Nine minutes exactly,” said he. “Then Pratt arrived here about
fourteen minutes to seven, and his body was found at five minutes to
seven--nine minutes after his arrival. The murderer couldn’t have
been far away then.”

“No, it was a pretty fresh scent,” replied the inspector. “You’d like
to see the body first, I think you said, sir?”

“Yes; and the knife, if you please.”

“I shall have to send down to the station for that. It’s locked up in
the office.”

He entered the house, and, having dispatched a messenger to the
police station, came out and conducted us to the outbuilding where
the corpse had been deposited. Thorndyke made a rapid examination of
the wounds and the holes in the clothing, neither of which presented
anything particularly suggestive. The weapon used had evidently been
a thick-backed, single-edged knife similar to the one described, and
the discolouration around the wounds indicated that the weapon had a
definite shoulder like that of a Norwegian knife, and that it had
been driven in with savage violence.

“Do you find anything that throws any light on the case?” the
inspector asked, when the examination was concluded.

“That is impossible to say until we have seen the knife,” replied
Thorndyke; “but while we are waiting for it, we may as well go and
look at the scene of the tragedy. These are Pratt’s boots, I think?”
He lifted a pair of stout laced boots from the table and turned them
up to inspect the soles.

“Yes, those are his boots,” replied Fox, “and pretty easy they’d have
been to track, if the case had been the other way about. Those
Blakey’s protectors are as good as a trademark.”

“We’ll take them, at any rate,” said Thorndyke; and, the inspector
having taken the boots from him, we went out and retraced our steps
down the avenue.

The place where the murder had occurred was easily identified by a
large dark stain on the gravel at one side of the drive, half-way
between two trees--an ancient pollard hornbeam and an elm. Next to
the elm was a pollard oak with a squat, warty bole about seven feet
high, and three enormous limbs, of which one slanted half-way across
the avenue; and between these two trees the ground was covered with
the tracks of men and hounds superimposed upon the hoof-prints of a
horse.

“Where was the knife found?” Thorndyke asked.

The inspector indicated a spot near the middle of the drive, almost
opposite the hornbeam and Thorndyke, picking up a large stone, laid
it on the spot. Then he surveyed the Scene thoughtfully, looking up
and down the drive and at the trees that bordered it, and, finally,
walked slowly to the space between the elm and the oak, scanning the
ground as he went. “There is no dearth of footprints,” he remarked
grimly, as he looked down at the trampled earth.

“No, but the question is, whose are they?” said the inspector.

“Yes, that is the question,” agreed Thorndyke; “and we will begin the
solution by identifying those of Pratt.”

“I don’t see how that will help us,” said the inspector. “We know he
was here.”

Thorndyke looked at him in surprise, and I must confess that the
foolish remark astonished me too, accustomed as I was to the
quick-witted officers from Scotland Yard.

“The hue and cry procession,” remarked Thorndyke, “seems to have
passed out between the elm and the oak; elsewhere the ground seems
pretty clear.” He walked round the elm, still looking earnestly at
the ground, and presently continued: “Now here, in the soft earth
bordering the turf, are the prints of a pair of smallish feet wearing
pointed boots; a rather short man, evidently, by the size of foot and
length of stride, and he doesn’t seem to have belonged to the
procession. But I don’t see any of Pratt’s; he doesn’t seem to have
come off the hard gravel.” He continued to walk slowly towards the
hornbeam with his eyes fixed on the ground. Suddenly he halted and
stooped with an eager look at the earth; and, as Fox and I
approached, he stood up and pointed. “Pratt’s footprints--faint and
fragmentary, but unmistakable. And now, inspector, you see their
importance. They furnish the time factor in respect of the other foot
prints. Look at this one and then look at that.” He pointed from one
to another of the faint impressions of the dead man’s foot.

“You mean that there are signs of a struggle?” said Fox.

“I mean more than that,” replied Thorndyke. “Here is one of Pratt’s
footprints treading into the print of a small, pointed foot; and
there at the edge of the gravel is another of Pratt’s nearly
obliterated by the tread of a pointed foot. Obviously the first
pointed footprint was made before Pratt’s, and the second one after
his; and the necessary inference is that the owner of the pointed
foot was here at the same time as Pratt.”

“Then he must have been the murderer!” exclaimed Fox.

“Presumably,” answered Thorndyke; “but let us see whither he went.
You notice, in the first place, that the man stood close to this
tree”--he indicated the hornbeam--“and that he went towards the elm.
Let us follow him. He passes the elm, you see, and you will observe
that these tracks form a regular series leading from the hornbeam and
not mixed up with the marks of the struggle. They were, therefore,
probably made after the murder had been perpetrated. You will also
notice that they pass along the backs of the trees--outside the
avenue, that is; what does that suggest to you?”

“It suggests to me,” I said, when the inspector had shaken his head
hopelessly, “that there was possibly some o