The
                                American
                              Consolidated
                                 Mines
                                Company
                              Illustrated


                              MINES IN THE
                          Rio Hondo District,
                          Taos Co., New Mexico




               _THE AMERICAN CONSOLIDATED MINES COMPANY_

              _Incorporated Under the Laws of New Mexico._

                _3,000,000 Shares. Par Value One Cent._

                     _To Avoid Excessive Taxation._




                      _All Stock Non-Assessable._
               _Stockholders have no Future Liabilities._
                      _The Company has no Debts._

                            _AT ORGANIZATION
                   TREASURY STOCK, 1,500,000 SHARES.
                      CASH IN TREASURY, $2,000.00_




                           _JANUARY 1, 1903,_
                _Stock in Treasury, — 1,300,000 Shares_
                    _Cash in Treasury — $11,866.82_

                       _OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS:_
                     _J. SHUMAKER,_    _President_
        _O. H. STANLEY,_    _Vice-President and General Manager_
              _C. D. WEIMER,_    _Secretary and Treasurer_
                   _C. P. CAMPBELL and MARTIN WEIMER_

                           _EASTERN OFFICE:_
                            _MINERVA, OHIO._
                           _WESTERN OFFICES:_
            _Colorado Springs, Colo., and Taos, New Mexico._




                             Introductory.


In calling your attention to one of the richest districts in the whole
Rocky Mountain system, we must say in the first place that the old
Spanish and Mexican land grant controversies have greatly retarded the
development of large tracts of the richest mineral lands throughout New
Mexico, particularly in Taos County; but the United States court of
private land claims and the United States supreme court have finally
passed upon the validity of practically all these grants, and this has
recently thrown open some very rich fields. Among these is the Rio Hondo
district in Taos County.

This district contains, without any exaggeration, almost inexhaustible
bodies of good paying gold, silver and copper ore. In the year 1680
these same Taos mountains gave up millions in gold and silver to the
Spaniards, although worked by the crudest possible methods; and now,
after lying idle for hundreds of years they are again about to give up
their treasures to a few lucky corporations who have secured property in
this vicinity. The Rio Hondo District is situated about the center of
the county, a few miles north of the quaint old Mexican town of Taos,
the county seat. Plenty of mining timber and streams of the clearest
water make this an ideal place for reduction plants and the economic
handling of ores.

In speaking of mining, many people think of a mining proposition as a
gamble. True it is, that the unscrupulous promoter has been too much in
evidence, and it is not surprising that an intelligent public is
inclined to look with suspicion at even the legitimate mining
enterprise. Mining when conducted along business lines, is just as
legitimate and far more profitable than any other enterprise, but the
investor must exercise care and judgment if he would make his
investments profitable.

Mining is not affected by seasons or stagnant markets. Manufactories are
influenced by competition, over-stocked market, variations in the price
of raw material, and by the condition of the financial centers. Farming
depends largely on the weather, and even when everything conspires to
produce good crops, market conditions are frequently such as to subject
the farmer to a loss of his entire season’s work.

    [Illustration: Concentrating Plant and Smelter—1¼ Miles from the
    “American.”]

The product of the mountain is always the same. The mines are the banks
established by nature; are not affected by runs; have a market that is
always certain, with a demand that is constantly increasing and a wealth
of resource—the limit of which is co-extensive with the world.

But there is one thing that investors should bear in mind: “_Mines are
made—not found_,” and a mine is not made in a day. When any other
business is being built up, investors do not look for dividends until a
market is created and the supply is sufficient to meet the demand. Many
good mines have been ruined by the haste of stockholders in demanding
dividends before the mine is put in condition to pay; and by their
refusal to recognize the necessity for a large outlay in order to make
dividends certain.


                              Description.

The American Consolidated Mines Company is organized and incorporated
under the laws of New Mexico. The capital stock is divided into
3,000,000 shares (forever non-assessable). On organization there was
placed in the treasury 1,500,000 shares and $2,000.00 cash. Our
treasurer’s report shows the company to be in a flourishing condition
financially. (See report on following page.) On January 1, 1903, there
was in the treasury 1,300,000 shares and a cash balance of $11,866.82.
_This large treasury reserve_ assures the company of ample means with
which to thoroughly develop its properties, erect a suitable reduction
plant, to treat company ores and make any other necessary improvements.

The Company now owns the Berry, Berry Extension, American and Dewey
lodes (each claim contains 20.6 acres), and the Coinage mill site of
five acres, a total of 87.4 acres of the choicest mining property in the
Rio Hondo District. This property is covered with the finest of timber
and has abundance of water, two very necessary factors in mining.


                         Veins and Development.

Rich float has always been found on this section of Gold Hill, now the
property of the American Con. Mines Company, and when development was
commenced it could have but one result, the finding of the veins or ore
bodies from which the rich float originated.

    [Illustration: View of Twining, New Mexico—1¼ Miles from the
    “American” Mines. Showing the Fraser Mine and Reduction Plant.]

The main vein of this group traverses the Berry, Berry Extension and
American lodes, which has been opened up in various places along its
course, and proves it continuous for at least three thousand feet. This
vein is strong and well defined and at the different openings is from
eight to twelve feet wide. The quartz is rich in gold and copper with
small values in silver, and carrying iron and copper pyrites more or
less throughout it. Mill tests from this vein show values in gold and
copper of $22.40. Two tests recently made by Mr. E. C. Woodward,
assayer, Colorado Springs, Colo., show values as follows:

          Gold oz.     Value    Copper, per cent.

               1.32    $26.46          15.2
               2.81     56.20

One test for copper on December 31, 1902, gave 14.8 per cent. or values
of $29.60 in copper.

The Dewey claim is intersected by numerous quartz dykes, carrying good
values in gold and copper. Surface indications point to large bodies of
high grade gold bearing ore. Recent tests from shallow workings upon
this claim gave values of over $60.00 in gold to the ton, which leads us
to believe that shoots of very high grade ore may be expected when this
vein series is cut at greater depth.

Development has progressed steadily during 1902 and on January 1, 1903,
inspection of the property showed 550 feet of tunnels, drifts, shafts,
etc. The main or No. 2 tunnel was in 211 feet with an approximate depth
of 133 feet.

There has been erected all necessary buildings such as bunk and boarding
houses, tool house, blacksmith shop, etc. The tunnel has been equipped
with cars and track and the necessary roadways, logways, etc., have been
built. In fact all the preliminary work connected with mining has been
completed and everything is in the best of shape for careful and
economic mining. Work will be prosecuted with all speed and when greater
depth is gained a crosscut will be run from the main tunnel and the vein
series of the Dewey lode will be opened up and developed at great depth.

    [Illustration: Pictures of the “American” Mines.
    No. 1 Tunnel.
    Mines Working in the Main or No. 2 Tunnel.
    Tunnel House and Blacksmith Shop at Entrance of Main Tunnel.
    Bunk House.
    Boarding House.]


                          Present Conditions.

A recent communication from our general manager, Mr. O. H. Stanley,
reads as follows: “Development is progressing in a very satisfactory
manner, and recent assays prove that my estimate, given in a former
report, as to the average value of our ore was very conservative, and we
may reasonably expect increased values as more depth is gained.”

(Following is an extract of the report referred to in the above.)

A mill run made some time ago showed values as follows: $16.40 in gold,
1½ per cent copper and 60 cents silver per ton, a total value of $22.40
per ton. Taking this conservative estimate as the average value of the
ore, and counting only the ore available between the two points opened
up upon the “Berry” and the “Berry Extension” workings, above the level
of the “Berry Extension” tunnel, would give sufficient ore to keep a
100-ton plant working day and night for over 10 years. This large
quantity of ore would be taken out without the use of hoisting or
pumping machinery. This, together with every natural facility, such as
water power, cheap fuel, and an abundance of timber, makes this an ideal
location for the economic handling of ores.

I would estimate that with a 100-ton reduction plant in operation, that
the total cost of mining and reducing 100 tons of ore to 10 tons of
concentrates, and the transportation, smelting and refining of same
would be as follows:

  Mining and timbering, at $3.00 per ton                              $300 00
  Crushing and concentrating, at $2.00 per ton                         200 00
  Freight, smelting and refining, 10 tons of concentrates, $24.00      240 00
      per ton
  Daily expense                                                       $740 00

                                   RECEIPTS.

  Ten tons of concentrates, at $224.00 per ton                      $2,240 00
  Deduct daily expenses                                                740 00
  Daily profit                                                      $1,500 00

    [Illustration: The American’s Main Tunnel in Winter.
    Showing Monster Outcropping of Ore at the “American” Property.]


                        The District in General.

Wonderful progress has been made throughout the entire Rio Hondo
District, but probably the most gigantic and successful mining
enterprise in New Mexico is that the Fraser Mt. Company, which is a
short distance south of the American. They have erected and put in
successful operation a smelter and concentrating plant of 120 tons daily
capacity, and the management is now perfecting plans to double the
capacity of their works and to install a larger electric power plant.

Recent advices from Mr. Harlan, President of the New Mexico and Pacific
R. R., report rapid progress with the new railroad enterprise. We quote
the following extracts from Mr. Harlan’s letter:

“Our present plans contemplate construction on from Raton to
Elizabethtown, a distance of a little over 75 miles, but our total
trackage will be about 80 miles. Of course, it is not our intention to
stop with this little piece of road, but when it is extended to the
West, the question will be where to find the most feasible route to
cross the mountains. The Taos Valley, the Canon of the Rio Grande and
the rolling mesas beyond the Rio Grande, and as this route will be
difficult at best, very little attention can be given to present
established localities. I mention this to show that even though the road
is extended to the West, and we do expect to extend it, still your camp
will always be the best served over the road connecting with the
railroad in the Moreno Valley.”

By the above it will be seen that we will in the near future be favored
by convenient railroad facilities, which will very materially enhance
the value of property throughout the District.

Mr. O. H. Stanley, a mining man of six years experience in this
district, has general superintendence of the development of the American
Consolidated Mines Company property. His long experience in this
district, together with his knowledge of the condition and character of
the ores, make him a very valuable man and stockholders in this company
are to be congratulated on having such a man at the head of its mining
department.

    [Illustration: _SKETCH MAP
    PART OF THE RIO HONDO DISTRICT
    TAOS COUNTY
    NEW MEXICO._
    MAP NOT DRAWN TO SCALE]


      Statement of Treasury of the American Consolidated Mines Co.

  Cash on hand at organization                          $2,000 00
  Cash stock sales and installment stock closed          4,035 54
  Cash received on installment sales not yet closed      2,073 25
  Bills receivable (balance payable on installment       7,940 09
      stock)
  Expenses to close 1902                                            $4,182 06
  Cash on hand (including bills receivable)                         11,866 82
                                                       $16,048 88  $16,048 88


                         Policy of Management.

Work will continue to be prosecuted with all speed, and to the best
interests of all. Our plans contemplate extensive development and
improvement in equipment along all lines.

Proceeds from the sale of treasury stock will be used for the sole
benefit of the stockholders. We wish to thank the stockholders for their
liberal support in the past, and ask your continued co-operation—if not
in a financial way, we shall equally appreciate any words of approval
you may have to offer for the enterprise. The interests of one are the
interests of all, and we shall work accordingly.

    [Illustration: Decorative glyph]

    [Illustration: A Street in Twining, New Mexico.
    Views of Mountains in the Rio Hondo District.]


Extracts from Bulletin on Taos County, New Mexico, issued by the Bureau
                            of Immigration.


                              Taos County.

Taos is the most picturesque and in many respects one of the richest in
mineral resources of New Mexico counties. It is also the oldest in point
of settlement by white men, and one of the best watered sections of the
territory.

The Sangre de Christo range is the backbone of the county. Its peaks
rise to an altitude of over 13,000 feet. From it extend toward the west
foothills and the mesa through which the Rio Grande river breaks its
way, as well as some fifteen perennial streams which have broken,
picturesque canons and mighty gorges, or have eroded fertile valleys.
Spreading out fan-shaped on either side of the main range, and covering
a large part of the area of Taos on the west and a large area in Colfax
county on the eastern slope are rugged mountain masses reaching an
altitude of 13,000 feet above the sea. As at Cripple Creek, the
formation of the entire region is largely the result of volcanic forces,
consisting mainly of porphyritic and trachytic dykes and overflows,
intersected by innumerable veins or lodes, carrying gold, silver, copper
and iron. Above Twining is the Rio Hondo and the Black Copper districts,
both rich in gold, silver and copper. Mines in these districts are being
actively and systematically developed by modern methods and many of them
are regularly out-putting large quantities of ore that either reward
treatment at district smelters, or are profitably milled or concentrated
near the mines. Much of the gold ore is free milling and little of it is
seriously refractory—the iron content more than offsetting the small
percentage of sulphur and other refractory ingredients. The average
values are from $10.00 to $50.00 per ton and bodies are frequently
encountered that run a great deal higher. The large bodies of ore in the
Rio Hondo and the Copper Hill districts yield their values readily to
modern concentrating processes and it seems probable that concentrating
will prove an important factor in the future development of the mineral
resources of the entire county.

Portions of Taos county are heavily timbered and in general the county
is the best timbered in the territory. On account of the difficulty in
bringing the merchantable timber from the steep mountain sides to the
railroad, saw mills are in operation in various parts of the county, the
principal being near Questa and Twining.

The visitor finds here many things to interest him, particularly the
Taos Indian pueblo, called by Charles F. Lummis “The American Pyramids.”
Here one can study the customs of centuries ago, folklore tales, and try
to fathom the secrets of the “Kivas,” or council chambers of these
Indians, and the many ceremonial functions and mystic dances. (See
picture page 17.)

    [Illustration: Hunting in the Rio Hondo District.
    “Jack” and His Bear.]

The old town of Taos is practically today as it was centuries ago; to
see the inhabitants toiling in the gardens and fields, carries us back
to the time of Moses, as did the children toil upon the plains of
Shimar. Some very old ruins, presumably Pueblo, are to be seen to the
right when nearing the main town. An interesting feature is one of the
churches of the Pueblo Indians, near Taos. It appears that these Indians
rebelled against the United States government once, and but only once,
in the latter part of the ’50s, and took refuge in this old church. (See
picture page 17). Whereupon General Sterling Price bombarded them with
cannon from a distant point, until the Indians hoisted a flag of truce
from the top of the old church. The effect of the bombardment is in
evidence today, the holes made by the shells were never repaired.

Scores of tourists come to visit the Indian Pueblo annually, especially
on its annual feast day, San Geronimo, September 30. The Jicarilla
Apache Indians, the Navajos as well as the Pueblos from the south send
delegations to this festival and the settlers for scores of miles around
gather at the Pueblo on that day. (See picture page 17).


     What Stockholders Say Who Have Visited the Rio Hondo District.

Mr. S. D. Mason, of Andover, Ohio, says in a letter of Dec. 10th, 1902:

In October I visited the American Consolidated mines for the purpose of
investigating the property for myself and several friends who agreed if
I reported favorably to buy stock. I found the mine all that had been
claimed for it and more. Am so well satisfied with the property that I
have bought 15,000 shares, and my friends are taking stock as fast as I
can get to them to explain the situation. I have sold 50,000 shares
without asking a single person to buy. The mine is no longer a prospect.
It is a mine today. We have the ore, the timber, the water and an honest
management, and that is all that is required to make it a sure winner. I
can only say to you as I say to my friends here, that the mine is there,
that I have put good money into it and could give it no better
recommendation.

Mr. Wm. Hinman, City Assessor of Lansing, Mich., says:

My recent visit to New Mexico, the Rio Hondo District in particular,
where I spent almost a week looking over the property of the American
Consolidated Mines Company, has convinced me that I made no mistake in
investing in a block of “American” stock. I will say that I never before
had faith in mining ventures, but on investigation of the American
Company, and the character of their richly mineralized properties that
years of work cannot exhaust, I am satisfied that no investment can be
more sterling and safe than that offered by The American Consolidated
Mines Company.

    [Illustration: Views in the Vicinity of the “American” Mines.
    The Indian Pueblo.
    The Old Church, Destroyed in the 50’s.
    The Sunset Dance.
    Annual Feast Day of the Pueblo Indians.]


                           Other References.

Hon. E. C. Abbott, U. S. District Attorney, Santa Fe, New Mexico.

Ex-Senator Alexander Gusdorf, Taos, New Mexico.

Geo. P. Miller, U. S. Mineral Surveyor and Mining Engineer, Taos, New
Mexico.

William McKean, U. S. Mineral Surveyor and Mining Engineer, Taos, New
Mexico.

Those who are at all interested in intelligent, progressive and
profitable mining should, for further information concerning The
American Consolidated Mines properties, and the price of stock, address,

                                      C. D. WEIMER, Secretary-Treasurer,
                                                          Minerva, Ohio.

    [Illustration: (Prospector)]

    [Illustration: Views in the Vicinity of the “American” Mines.
    Gold Hill—1½ Miles above the American Property.
    The Junction of the Rio Hondo and the Rio Grande Rivers.
    Manufacturing Brick—4 Miles Below the “American.”
    Arroyo Seco, a Mexican Town at the Mouth of the Rio Hondo Canyon.]


                       The New York Herald Says:

“It is an undeniable fact that most influential business men of the
world have turned their attention to mining, the source of nearly all
wealth; for persons who have been enslaved to the idea that the only
safe proposition was a five or six per cent security, now realize that
many millions of interest have been lost to them through heeding the
advice of those interested in cheap money, and that among the banking
institutions of the West eighteen to twenty per cent per annum is not
considered a hazardous western profit or excessive dividend on the great
majority of our gilt-edged mining securities, and, further, the richest
men in the world are mining kings, many of whom have grown powerful
enough through the proper application of originally a moderate capital,
and it is proven that while millions of dollars have been lost in
railroads, farm mortgages, eastern industrial and building associations,
the American mining industry steadily advances, making enormous profits
for its supporters, building great states and cities, and points with
pride to the American possession of 253 mines that have paid in
dividends over $625,000,000.

“In mining investments extremely large amounts are not necessary to make
one successful, for the man of moderate means, properly advised, has
opportunities of quickly doubling his capital. Under incorporation great
achievements are made possible through combining limited sums of
thousands, thus equaling the capital of the individual millionaire,
making possible gigantic undertakings that are productive of enormous
revenue. The dollar of the man of moderate means is equally as powerful
as the dollar of the money king. Both serve their purpose; both are
entitled to their proportionate profits.

“In legitimate mining a twenty-five per cent dividend is not considered
startling, and the mining interests of the West are willing to pay that
interest for the use of money, for, by the aid of capital they open up
tremendous ore bodies that lead to still greater fortunes. The
employment of $10,000 in mining is the equivalent of $40,000 in most any
other branch of industry.

“For years the wondrous profits of the metal industries have been
whispered among investors, who apparently were afraid to let their
neighbors know they were identified with mining, but the recent efforts
of the financial czars of the world in forming combinations to control
first the markets of the miners through the ‘smelting trust’ and then
the mines through the ‘Amalgamated Copper trust’ have opened the eyes of
the conservative and modern investors, and they are making efforts to
obtain their share of the metallic wealth which nature has spread so
lavishly.

“Nature has laid her treasures in the mountain recesses of the West. The
American miner searches them out. Eastern money makes possible their
conversion into bullion and the joint results of the miner and the
capitalists make possible tremendous profits that signalize successful
mining.”


  America possesses 253 mines that have paid in dividends over
  $625,000,000.

  Do you know that the American Consolidated Mines Company owns
  properties in one of the richest mineral districts in the United
  States?

  The “American” is a mining enterprise of merit. Its shares are
  advancing in price rapidly.

  Do you know you are losing money by not investing in a reliable mining
  enterprise?

  If you are interested in mining, the mineral wealth of New Mexico is
  something you should investigate.

  Buy “American” shares for a safe investment.

  Large amounts of money are not necessary to make one successful in
  meritorious mining enterprises.

  The “American” has an energetic, progressive management.

  An honest investment for honest investors.

    [Illustration: Back cover]




                                  The
                         American Consolidated
                               Mines Co.,

                     C. D. WEIMER, Secy. and Treas.
                             Minerva, Ohio.

                                  The
                         American Consolidated
                               Mines Co.,

                           TAOS, NEW MEXICO.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

—Collected all the page-header advertising slogans into one section at
  the end of the prospectus.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN CONSOLIDATED MINES COMPANY (1903) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.