[Illustration: MAY, 1883.

VOL. XXXVII.

No. 5.

The American Missionary]




CONTENTS


                                                         PAGE.


  EDITORIAL.

    THIS NUMBER—BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK                     129
    MOZART SOCIETY OF FISK UNIVERSITY                      130
    COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTION—GENERAL NOTES                131
    BENEFACTIONS                                           132
    ANNIVERSARY ANNOUNCEMENTS                              133
    ALABAMA CONFERENCE                                     134
    LOUISIANA CONFERENCE                                   135


  BROADSIDE ON TEMPERANCE.

    CONCERT EXERCISE                                       136
    CUT                                                    139
    TEMPERANCE WORK IN CHURCHES                            141
    HINDRANCES                                             142
    TEMPERANCE OUTLOOK AT MEMPHIS                          143
    TEMPERANCE IN TEXAS                                    144
    TOUGALOO AND TEMPERANCE                                145
    NEGRO CABINS (cut)                                     146
    HIGHER LAW AND INDIVIDUAL RIGHT ON OUR SIDE            147
    NOTES AT ALA. STATE S. S. CONVENTION                   148
    TEMPERANCE AMONG OUR CHINESE                           149
    HOODLUMS AT STREET CORNER (cut)                        149


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    SEQUEL TO TED’S TEMPERANCE SOCIETY                     150


  RECEIPTS                                                 151


  PROPOSED CONSTITUTION                                    156

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK.
         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
          Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y.,
                      as second-class matter.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRESIDENT.

  HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


TREASURER.

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


AUDITORS.

  M. F. READING.
  WM. A. NASH.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN
ABBOTT, ALONZO S. BALL, A. S. BARNES, C. T. CHRISTENSEN, FRANKLIN
FAIRBANKS, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES
A. HULL, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, WM. H. WARD, A. L.
WILLISTON.


DISTRICT SECRETARIES

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
  Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
  Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *


“I THINK I’D LIKE TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS WHEN I’M SIXTY.”

The gentleman who made the above remark carries a $10,000 endowment
policy in the STATE MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY, of Worcester,
Mass. That sum will be paid to _him_ at “sixty,” or to his family
if he dies before reaching that age.

Thousands of men now living will _need_ $10,000 when they become
“sixty”—and their families will need it should they die before
attaining that age. Both of these objects can be secured by the
payment of a small sum each year to

THE STATE MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE CO., OF WORCESTER, MASS.,

Which is one of the OLDEST, STRONGEST and BEST companies in the
United States.

This Company guarantees a CASH-SURRENDER value of every policy it
issues after the second annual payment.

EXAMPLE.

1. An ordinary life policy, issued at the age of 30 for $10,000,
annual premium $226.30. (The second and all subsequent premiums
will be reduced by dividends.) After ten annual premiums have been
paid, the guaranteed cash-surrender value is $909.80; the paid-up
value $2,387.70, or more than gross premiums paid. The _net_ cost
for the past ten years of all similar policies has been $1,692.77,
which reduced the cost of the insurance to $7.83 per $1,000 for
each year.

This Company never disputes, or resists, an honest claim. It has
been a party to only four suits in thirty-eight years—and in _no
case_ have the courts held a claim, resisted by the company, _to be
valid_.

For full explanations, please call on or address

                  CC. W. ANDERSON, General Agent,
                                       145 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXVII.      MAY, 1883.         NO. 5.

                 *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

We place before our readers in this issue of our magazine a
considerable number of communications on the subject of temperance.
We believe, our missionaries are in the best possible position to
reach not only the children but adults, and to train them in habits
of virtue and sobriety. We have from the first put great stress
on the importance of abstinence from the use of alcoholic drinks
and tobacco, and the encouraging reports given herewith indicate
the success we have achieved. We publish also a concert exercise
relating chiefly to temperance work in the missions of the A. M.
A. It is our purpose to issue this in an eight-page circular which
will contain the recitations in full, and the words and music of
the Jubilee song known as _Rise and Shine_. The circular will be
illustrated with cuts. Further particulars are given in connection
with the concert exercise on another page.

       *       *       *       *       *


BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

It has become an axiom in missionary work that no race can be
lifted out of ignorance and degradation except as its women are
elevated. One of the marked features of this age in mission work
is the clearness with which this is seen and the enthusiastic and
successful efforts put forth by the noble women of the churches
in this behalf. It is not merely the money which these efforts
bring to the missionary societies, but the zeal for the conversion
of the world infused by them into the church and the home. The
Christian mother catches the enthusiasm, and the children feel its
inspiration. Missionary education becomes the life-work in the
family.

The American Missionary Association has from the outset realized
the indispensable need of the elevation of woman in its work in
the South, among the Indians, and, as far as possible, among
the Chinese at the West. Its workers, largely women, have been
specially adapted to it. The lady teachers have reached not merely
the girls in their schools, but the mothers in their homes. The
lady missionaries have labored for the purification of the home
through direct visits, in mothers’ meetings, in industrial work
taught to the girls, in the Sunday-school, and in temperance work.
We have become so impressed with the importance and success of
this part of our work that we are constrained to give it a broader
basis and a more thorough organization. Our aim is not only to do
more work for woman, but to give the Christian ladies of the North
and West more full information as to the way in which they can
co-operate with us. We wish to show that not only in varied ways,
but with small sums of money they can reach the women for whom we
labor.

To attain these results the Executive Committee of the A. M. A. has
organized a BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK. The object is:

1. To give information to the ladies in the churches of the variety
of work now sustained by the Association, and to assist in devising
plans of help.

2. To promote correspondence with churches, Sabbath-schools,
missionary societies, or individuals, who will undertake work of a
special character, such as the support of missionaries, aiding of
students, supplying clothing, furnishing goods, and meeting other
wants on mission ground.

3. To send to the Churches, Conferences or Associations desiring it
some of our experienced and intelligent lady missionaries, who can
address them giving fuller details of our methods.

We believe that such a Bureau will meet a felt want and be welcomed
by the earnest Christian women of the country. The selection of
the head of the Bureau will be made and announced soon, and in the
meantime inquiries can be addressed to Bureau of Woman’s Work,
American Missionary Association, 56 Reade street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE Mozart Society of Fisk University tendered a complimentary
concert to the members of the Tennessee Legislature. The invitation
was accepted; and on the evening of March 15, the members with
their ladies, and other friends to the number of three or four
hundred, filled the University chapel. The concert was excellent,
and the guests were deeply impressed. Complimentary speeches were
made at the close by the Speaker of the House and the President
of the Senate; and both houses afterwards passed a resolution of
thanks. One member sought an introduction to President Cravath
after the concert, saying, “This evening marks an era in my life.
You have converted me on the negro question.” Much credit is due to
the Mozart Society and to Prof. Spence for the manner in which the
whole entertainment was rendered.

       *       *       *       *       *


At our last annual meeting, held in Cleveland, a committee was
appointed to report amendments to the Constitution of this
Association. The Committee consisted of Hon. Wm. B. Washburn, Rev.
G. M. Boynton, A. L. Williston, Esq., Rev. W. T. Eustis, D.D.,
Rev. A. H. Plumb, D.D., of Mass., Austin Abbott, Esq., John H.
Washburn, Esq., of New York, Jacob L. Halsey, of New Jersey, Rev.
L. W. Bacon, D.D., Rev. L. T. Chamberlain, D.D., of Conn., Rev. C.
T. Collins, of Ohio, Rev. A. H. Ross, of Mich., Rev. F. A. Noble,
D.D., of Illinois. Feb. 21, the above Committee met at the rooms of
this Association, all the members being present except Drs. Noble
and Chamberlain, who were detained by sickness in their households.

After protracted discussion and the earnest advocacy of various
views, the Committee unanimously agreed to report a draft of
a Constitution, which we give elsewhere in this number of the
MISSIONARY. The Committee will submit the Proposed Constitution
to the different State Conferences and Associations for action in
accordance with the instructions given at the annual meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—There is thought of founding at Natal an industrial and
agricultural school for the natives.

—Efforts are being made for the erection of a machine for the
manufacture of fire-water at Bailunda, West Central Africa.
Christians! which shall the poor negro have first, strong drink or
the gospel?

—The missionaries of the Livingstone Inland Mission have multiplied
their stations along the lower Congo. Invited by several chiefs
along the left bank of the river, they have founded one at Kimorie,
another upon the same river and on the other side of the Loukoungou.

—Mr. C. Gregory has started to explore the regions east of
Abyssinia. From Khartoum he went up upon the Abyssinian plateau,
from whence he descended toward the territory inhabited by the
Afars and traversed by the Gualima and the Melli rivers, flowing
from the Haowasch.

—A society has been established at London under the title of the
Congo and Central African Company, with a capital of 250,000 livres
sterling, to traffic along the western side of Africa, especially
upon the Congo, using the road constructed by Stanley.

—A letter from Cairo announces that Mr. Wissmann had arrived in
that city the first of January. Between the lake Moucambe and
Nyangoué, he passed through the territory of a tribe of dwarf
negroes. From lake Tanganyika to Zanzibar, his journey was made
without great difficulty, owing to the aid given by Mirambo.


THE CHINESE.

—The Methodist Episcopal Church has founded a university at Japan,
through the liberality of Rev. Mr. Goucher, of Baltimore. The
Theological Seminary has been removed from Yokohama to Tokio, and
incorporated with it.

—The Presbyterian Board is about to open a new mission in China, in
the province of Shautung. It will be located at Wei Hein, a city
midway between Tsinan and Tungchon. There will be three laborers.
There are now forty missionaries of all denominations in the
province, among a population of 30,000,000.

—An Anti-Opium Prayer Union has been formed in Great Britain, of
which the members residing in different parts covenant to pray at
least once a week, on Thursdays, for the overthrow of the appalling
and accursed opium trade in China and elsewhere.

—Of the Chinese students at Yale ordered home two years ago,
Mum Yew Chung, who was coxswain of the crew of 1881, is in the
office of the United States Consul-General at Shanghai; Wong is
in partnership with Spencer Laisim, of the class of 1879, they
having opened a translating agency; Chang, of the class of ’83, is
at leisure, and desirous of returning to America; and Low, of the
class of ’84, is married to a daughter of a merchant prince, and is
likely to attain official honors. Tsoy Sin Kee is also married.


THE INDIANS.

—The rightful residents of the Indian Territory have forwarded to
Washington a list of 2,400 names of intruders.

—Martin B. Lewis, a missionary of the Sunday-School Union, writes
that on a recent Sunday at the Sisseton Reservation, half of the
children at the Sunday-school came without shoes, their feet being
sewed up in cloth; yet they were happy. A woman walked four and
a half miles when the mercury was ten degrees below zero to make
arrangements about organizing a school at her house. She had been
five years in a family of eight without hearing a sermon or a
prayer, and asserted that she could no longer live as a heathen.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

The will of Mr. Peter Ballentine contains a bequest of $5,000 to
Rutgers College.

Alida V. R. Constable bequeathed $4,000 to Union Theological
Seminary, New York.

Miss Mary Blake, of Kingston, N.H., has made a bequest of $10,000
to Tufts College.

Mr. A. E. Kent, of San Francisco, a member of the class of ’53, has
given $60,000 to Yale College.

Mr. Henry Winkley has added $10,000 to his previous gifts to
Andover Theological Seminary, making $60,000 in all.

Hon. Frederick Billings, of Woodstock, Vt., has given $75,000 to
Vermont University for a library building.

The late S. L. Crocker, of Taunton, Mass., bequeathed $5,000 to
Brown University to endow a scholarship to be called “Caroline
Crocker.”

By the will of the late Henry Seybert, the University of
Pennsylvania is to receive $120,000 for the endowment of a chair of
mental and moral philosophy and the endowment of a ward in the wing
for chronic diseases.

_The Committee on Education and Labor made a unanimous report last
winter to Congress that the people of the Southern States are
absolutely unable to provide the means necessary for sustaining
sufficient public schools without assistance. The A. M. A. has long
recognized this fact. Endowments for its schools and others similar
to them, whose object is to raise up Christian teachers, would
assure assistance of the most helpful and enduring character._

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARY ANNOUNCEMENTS.

Berea College, Berea, Ky.—Baccalaureate Sermon, June 17;
examination and anniversary exercises, June 14 to 20; Commencement,
June 20.

Hampton N. and A. Institute. Hampton, Va.—Examinations will be
conducted May 21, 22, 23; Trustees’ Meeting, Wednesday, the 23d,
and Anniversary, Thursday, the 24th.

Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga.—The annual examinations will
be conducted by the State Board of Examiners, June 11, 12, 13;
Commencement, June 14.

Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.—Baccalaureate Sermon, May 20;
examinations, May 21, 22, 23; Commencement exercises, May 24.

Tougaloo University, Tougaloo, Miss.—Baccalaureate Sermon, May 27;
examinations and Commencement exercises through the week.

Straight University, New Orleans, La.—Baccalaureate Sermon, Sunday,
May 27; Anniversary of Alumni, May 28; Commencement exercises, May
29.

Talladega College, Talladega, Ala.—Baccalaureate Sermon by
President H. S. DeForest, D.D., Sunday morning, May 27; missionary
sermon, Sunday evening; examinations, Monday, Tuesday and
Wednesday; address by Rev. C. L. Woodworth, of Boston, Wednesday
afternoon; closing exercises, Thursday.

Howard University, Washington, D.C.—The Theological Department
will hold its Anniversary in the Fourth Presbyterian church on
Ninth street, on Friday evening, May 4, when seven young men will
graduate and make addresses, and will be addressed by Rev. William
A. Bartlett, D.D.

Le Moyne School, Memphis, Tenn.—Sermon, Sunday, May 20; Anniversary
exercises, May 22, 23 and 24.

Avery Institute, Charleston, S.C.—Sermon, Sunday, June 24, by Rev.
A. G. Townsend, class of ’72; Monday, June 25, Children’s Day;
Wednesday, June 27, Address by Rev. C. C. Scott, class of ’72;
Friday, June 29, Graduating exercises.

Beach Institute, Savannah, Ga.—Sermon, Sunday, May 27; Anniversary
exercises from May 23 to May 30.

Storrs School, Atlanta, Ga.—Examinations, June 12 and 13;
Exhibition, Friday night, June 15.

Wilmington, N.C.—Examinations, May 24, 25 and 28; closing
exercises, Tuesday evening, May 29.

Brewer Normal School, Greenwood, S.C.—Examinations, June 25, 26 and
27; closing exercises, Thursday, June 28.

Emerson Institute, Mobile, Ala.—Examinations, May 8, 9, 10, 11;
public oral examinations, May 23, 24, 25; closing exhibition,
Friday evening, May 25.

Lewis High School, Macon, Ga.—Annual Address to the students by
Rev. J. W. Burke, of Macon, Tuesday evening, May 29; closing
exhibition, Thursday afternoon, May 31; closing concert, Thursday
evening, May 31.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA CONFERENCE.

BY PRES. H. S. DE FOREST, D.D.

The Cong. S. S. Association held its fourth, and the State
Conference its eighth, annual meeting in the chapel at Talladega
from the 23d to the 28th of March. This body, hereafter to be known
as the Congregational Association of Alabama, numbers thirteen
Churches, two in the northern part of the State being associated
with the Central South Conference of Tennessee. Seven of these
fifteen Alabama churches have grown out of Talladega College.
Naturally the desire to see the mother church was strong, and more
than eighty delegates and guests were in attendance. From beyond
the State, we had Supt. Roy, Rev. A. E. Dunning of Boston and Mrs.
A. S. Steele of Chattanooga, to each of whom the Conference is
indebted for efficient help. Sec. Dunning, the first of all our
society secretaries to visit the body, preached a sermon before
the Sunday-school Association good enough and fervid enough to
direct much of the thought of the four days that followed. His
theme was “The Holy Ghost the Source of Power,” and while much
in these meetings was delightful, nothing gave such hallowed
experiences or left such tender memories as the manifest presence
of God. Some thought they were breathing a revival atmosphere, and
one, it is hoped, who took that occasion to visit a daughter in
college, will regard Talladega as the Damascus gate. Other sermons
were by Rev. R. C. Bedford of Montgomery, by Rev. O. D. Crawford
of Mobile, before the sacrament, and by Dr. Roy at the ordination
of Rev. J. R. Sims of Shelby Iron Works, one of the sons of this
theological department and Church. These sermons were spoken and
not read. The aim of the preachers was evidently to do good on the
spot and at that time. There was little talk about the new light,
but a profound conviction that in these dark places there is need
of the light of the Gospel. The programme had been prepared with
a practical intent. Different phases of the Sunday-school work
took the strength of the first day. One evening was given to the
Sunday-school and Publishing Society and the American Missionary
Association, when the speakers were Sec. Dunning and Dr. Roy.
Another evening was devoted to missions, home and foreign. The
addresses were by Rev. A. W. Curtis and Rev. C. B. Curtis, who
have a brother in the foreign field, and one of whom was a home
missionary before coming South.

Such themes as Giving and Worship, Through what Societies—not
less than seven it was claimed, Is our Worship too Formal and
Unimpassioned, Temperance Economy and Industrial Education, were
well presented and discussed. Prof. Ellis read a very suggestive
paper on the Reciprocal Relation of the College to the Churches
of Alabama. The recommendations of this paper were indorsed by
special resolutions, and it is evident that Talladega College,
first and foremost among the schools open to Freedmen in Alabama,
was never more strongly intrenched in the love of the brethren than
now. Two hundred and ninety pupils have been in attendance during
the last year, and new buildings and appliances are called for.
Many and tender references were made to Prof. Andrews, temporarily
absent from ill-health, and he was a dull observer who could attend
these meetings, look upon these ministers, delegates, students and
graduates of the College, hear their words and drink their spirit,
and not feel that work in these reconstructing States is as heroic,
as hopeful, as imperative as any done in the great vineyard of the
Lord.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISIANA ASSOCIATION.

Annual Meeting at New Iberia, La.

BY REV. W. S. ALEXANDER, D.D.

This is the seventh annual meeting of this association I have
attended, and I am glad to be able to say that for sustained
interest, for vigorous thought expressed in the discussions, and
for wise planning for the future, the meeting of this year outranks
the previous ones. This is as it should be. It shows a degree of
study and fidelity on the part of the ministers which promises well
for the churches.

We are always glad to come to this beautiful Teche country. These
broad prairies are fertile as a garden. The soil is so easy of
cultivation, and yields such abundant harvests, and its market
value is so low, that it is within the power of every industrious
man to be a “proprietor of the soil,” and to own his homestead.
That is what the colored people are doing in this garden district
of the State, and it tells upon the character of the people and the
respect which they claim from the community.

It has been a year of quiet growth in most of the churches. Central
Church of New Orleans reports the largest accession, 46, of whom 40
came on profession of faith—the ingathering of the revival of last
winter. Some of the churches have been repaired and beautified;
debts have been paid off, or greatly reduced; disturbing elements
have been eliminated, and the way opened for a larger and more
healthful growth in the coming year.

One new church has been organized at Belle Place, near New Iberia,
and by the timely help of the A. M. A. will soon put up a tasteful
chapel, and will become, we hope, the center of religious influence
for a large colored population. Mr. Samson, the white planter,
encourages the enterprise by kind words and generous donations.

There are other open doors which we should enter at once. We can
hear the word of command: “Go up and possess the land.” How much
good a little financial aid would do just now in the beginning of
church enterprises, which, by God’s help, would grow into important
centers of good for the race.

I believe so thoroughly in the comity of churches, that where
the field is already occupied by other churches, and vigorously
cultivated by them, and the religious needs of the people are met,
I would not favor the establishment of another church, though its
creed and polity were more to our inclination. But the field is so
broad, and the destitution so great, that there is room for the
expenditure of the largest sympathy and the most vigorous effort
toward church enlargement. This missionary spirit was felt by the
Association, and the session of most tender interest was the last,
when the broad subject of missions was presented by eight speakers
selected by the business committee. The meeting had a glow to it
that was refreshing. Every one seemed to catch the inspiration and
to respond heartily to it.

Our field agent, Dr. Roy, always welcome, and always charged with
just the message which these churches and brethren need, brought
to us again this year, vigorous words, wise counsels, and the
kindest, most sympathetic spirit. Our association would hardly seem
complete without him.

Thus another year of effort, of struggle and of self-denial for
Christ, has left its record upon the churches, and has, we trust,
made a record in heaven, which we shall be willing to meet.

       *       *       *       *       *




CONCERT EXERCISE.

[This Concert Exercise will be enlarged and published in separate
form, and supplied gratuitously to any who may wish it for concert
purposes, on application to Rev. G. D. Pike, 56 Reade street, New
York.]


TEMPERANCE WORK IN MISSIONS OF A. M. A.

Singing. “Dare to do right. Dare to be true.”

Responsive Readings.

Leader. “Do not drink wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons
with thee when ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest
ye die; it shall be a statute forever throughout your generations.”
Lev. 10:9.

Girls. And the angel of the Lord said to the mother of Sampson:
“Thou shalt bear a son. Beware and drink not wine nor strong drink;
for the child shall be a Nazarite unto God to the day of his
death.” Judges 13:3, 4, 7.

Boys. “We will drink no wine, for Jonadab, the son of Rachab, our
father, commanded us, saying, ye shall drink no wine, neither ye
nor your sons forever.” Jer. 35:6.

Leader. “It is not for kings to drink wine, nor for princes strong
drink.” Prov. 31:4.

Girls. “Lest they drink and forget law and pervert the judgment of
any of the afflicted.” Prov. 31:5.

Boys. “Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of
nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength and not for
drunkenness.” Eccl. 10:17.

Leader. “They shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall
be bitter to them that drink it.” Isa. 24:9.

Girls. “For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; and
drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.” Prov. 23:21.

Boys. “Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.” I Cor. 6:10.

Leader. “Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who
hath babblings? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of
eyes?” Prov. 23:29.

Girls. “They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek
mixed wine.” Prov. 23:30.

Boys. “At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an
adder.” Prov. 23:32.

Leader. “But now I have written unto you, not to keep company, if
any man that is called a brother be an idolater, or a railer, or a
drunkard; with such a one, no, not to eat.” I Cor. 5:11.

Girls. “Restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, considering
thyself, lest thou also be tempted.” Gal. 6:1.

Boys. “Young men likewise, exhort to be sober minded.” Titus 2:6.

Leader. “And every man that striveth for the mastery, is temperate
in all things.” I Cor. 9:25.

Girls. “Therefore let us not sleep as do others; but let us watch
and be sober.” I Thes. 5:6.

Boys. “For they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be
drunken, are drunken in the night.” I Thes. 5:7.

Leader. “Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God.” 1 Cor. 10:31.

Prayer.

Singing.


POSITION SUSTAINED BY A. M. A.

Leader. What has been the attitude of the American Missionary
Association since its organization in 1846 on the temperance
question?

Girls. It has always taken a decided stand against the use and the
sale of intoxicating drink.

Boys. Its missionaries have been instructed to advocate the
cause of temperance, and to organize societies to promote total
abstinence from the use of alcoholic drink.

Leader. Does the Association assist missionaries, or students, who
refuse to abstain from the use of ardent spirits?

Girls. It is the rule of the Society in its work among the Indians,
the Chinese in America, and the Negroes at the South, to employ
only those who have good habits and settled convictions on all
moral subjects, including that of temperance.

Boys. In its collegiate and normal schools, where there are large
numbers of boarding students, all are required to observe habits of
total abstinence.


TEMPERANCE WORK AMONG INDIANS.

Leader. Have the Indians been subject to peculiar temptations to
intemperance?

Girls. Yes. On many of the reservations, our agents complain that
whiskey is a great curse. At the Leech Lake Agency, six Indians
were killed in drunken quarrels among themselves in six months.

Boys. Rev. Myron Eells, of Washington Territory, says he convicted
quite a number of persons for selling liquor to the Indians, which
aroused the fierce opposition of the whiskey ring, which had done
its utmost to prevent his success.

Leader. What has resulted from efforts for their reformation?

Girls. So much was accomplished by Rev. Mr. Spees and his wife at
Red Lake, that not a drunken Indian had been seen for many weeks.

Boys. At the Skokomish Agency, about 130 Indians took the
temperance pledge. Since then those who came under the influence of
the missionary abandoned the use of strong drink. The opposition,
however, by the liquor sellers was such that they burned seven
Indian houses by way of retaliation.

Leader. Do Indian youth readily accept temperance principles when
brought into the training schools of the Association?

Girls. They do. Those brought to Hampton by Capt. Pratt gave up
their tobacco and whiskey during the first year, held prayer
meetings together, and pursued the industrial occupations required
by the school without serious objection.

Boys. At the Green Bay Agency, within a few years, a great work has
been done in the way of temperance reform, so that Mr. Wheeler, the
missionary on the ground, says that a more temperate community of
its size cannot probably be found in the State of Wisconsin.

Singing.

Address on the Work of the Association among Indians.

[See April AMERICAN MISSIONARY for 1883.]


TEMPERANCE WORK AMONG THE CHINESE.

Leader. Are the Chinese on the Pacific Coast exposed to temptations
to intemperance?

Girls. Gen. C. H. Howard, writing from Sacramento, says: At their
groceries, liquors are always to be found. The older persons have a
prevalent habit of constantly smoking opium when in from their work.

Boys. The increase of traffic in opium in the United States has
been very great during the past twenty years, which is no doubt
partly accounted for from the presence of the Chinese.

Leader. Do Christian influences make the Chinamen better?

Girls. At an annual festival in Sacramento, a converted Chinaman
said of the converts among his countrymen: “Oh yes, all much better
men, do not steal, do not gamble, do not do any bad, no opium,
some not even smoke cigars. We can tell, all other Chinamen watch
Christian Chinamen. When he is converted and believes truth, it
makes him good inside. He don’t want to go wrong anymore. If all
Chinamen be Christians then no more trouble about ‘must go.’”

Boys. Among the 2,567 Chinese students in the schools of the
American Missionary Association last year, religious work was very
encouraging. About one in ten of those who came under the influence
of the society are converted. These abandon their evil habits as
readily as converts among other races.

Recitation. By a little girl. “Washee Washee.”

[See January MISSIONARY, 1883.]


TEMPERANCE WORK AMONG THE COLORED PEOPLE OF THE SOUTH.

Leader. Are temptations to intemperance common among the colored
people?

Girls. Yes. More so now, than in the days of slavery. When slaves,
it was not for the interest of their masters to furnish them strong
drink as a beverage, and the Negroes had but little opportunity or
money to purchase it for themselves.

Boys. They now have the privilege of working for wages, and most of
the grocery stores as well as the saloons keep liquor, and are glad
to get the Negro’s money for it.

Leader. Are there not laws in the different Southern States,
prohibiting the sale of intoxicating drinks to minors and to
drunken persons?

Girls. There are in quite a number of those States, but these laws
are not often enforced.

Boys. In some States they have local option laws in which the
counties can vote prohibition, and when temperance measures are
carried it is largely the result of Negro votes.

Leader. Has the American Missionary Association found an open door
for temperance work in its missions South?

Girls. It has. Some years the pupils in attendance have numbered
40,000, among whom were persons of all ages.

Boys. Not unfrequently the enthusiasm for establishing temperance
societies has been very great. Middle-aged and gray-haired men and
women have eagerly sought to enter the Bands of Hope established
by the children, and when admitted have been lifted up from their
vices and advanced in sobriety and usefulness.

Leader. Can you give some statements relating to the work in
particular missions?

[Illustration]

Girls. At Talladega, Ala., they have a Union Temperance
Society, which holds monthly meetings full of interest. All the
Sunday-school and all the College students are members. They keep
the work lively among all their mission schools.

Boys. At Marion, Ala., there is a regular temperance catechising
in the day-school against rum and tobacco, also in three mission
Sunday-schools. For several weeks before Christmas, mass meetings
are held in different churches, at which addresses are made on the
subject.

Leader. Are the churches of the Association committed to the cause
of temperance?

Girls. They are. Many of the churches have distinctive rules,
requiring abstinence from the use as a beverage of intoxicating
drinks, and forbidding the selling of such.

Boys. The churches and conferences of the Association are
practically temperance societies. They hold temperance as an
article of their faith and undertake to exercise discipline on that
principle.

Leader. Are they peculiar in their treatment of the subject of
temperance?

Girls. They differ from many churches South in this particular. A
pastor in Savannah writes: “No one can tell the importance of these
Congregational organizations here except those on the ground. Our
church has taken an open bold stand against liquor drinking and
liquor traffic. Our little temperance society has become a power in
the city and surrounding country. It has provoked others to good
works. Two other societies have been organized in the city and one
at Belmont.”

Boys. At Childersburg, Ala., Rev. A. Jones had his church burned
after giving a temperance lecture, but instead of surrendering, his
people have rallied and they are building better than before.

Leader. What has been the success of the work for temperance in the
Sunday-schools of the Association?

Girls. Among the 7,000 scholars in the Sunday-schools, a very
encouraging work has been carried on year by year. Bands of Hope
have been organized and temperance gatherings held and pledges
signed by a very large number of children.

Boys. Mr. Curtis writes from Alabama as follows: “Temperance at
Anniston booming. The whole country thoroughly aroused. Temperance
taught in the Sunday-school. Band of Hope meetings, temperance
prayer-meetings and mass meetings with lectures and discussions.”

Leader. Do those who go forth from the schools of the Association
to teach and preach promote the cause of temperance?

Girls. They do. Over 150 who were converted to the cause of
temperance while at Tougaloo, Miss., signed the pledge and did
temperance work in connection with the teaching in the common
schools, and in various other ways.

Boys. During a single year the total number of signers to the
pledge obtained by the students connected with one of the
institutions of the Association was 1,300. The teachers sent forth
from the normal classes exert great influence, not only in the
schools where they give instruction, but also among their friends
and neighbors in the localities where they carry on their work.

Singing.

Recitation by a little girl. “_Question of Color._”

[See AMERICAN MISSIONARY for October, 1882.]

Address on Temperance Work of the A. M. A.

[See AMERICAN MISSIONARY, May, 1883.]


THINGS NEEDFUL.

Leader. What is needful in order that the American Missionary
Association may succeed in its great work among the Indians,
Chinese and Negroes?

Girls. Above all things it is desirable that those in its schools
should give their hearts to the Lord Jesus Christ, in order that
they may have a great teacher and helper to guide and assist them
in all their efforts for the practice of Christian virtues.

Boys. They need also a larger number of well educated missionaries
to go among them to instruct and encourage them in all that
pertains to right living.

Leader. What two things can all those who have taken a part in this
Concert Exercise do to assist the American Missionary Association?

Girls. Every one can pray that the Lord will send forth laborers
and pour out his Holy Spirit upon the schools and churches
established for the Indians, Chinese and Negroes in America.

Boys. Each one can contribute money for the support of missionaries
and to help those who are studying to become teachers and ministers
among three great races represented in the work of the Association.

Recitation by boy. “_Missionary Music._”

[See AMERICAN MISSIONARY, Feb., 1883.]

Singing. Jubilee Song, “_Rise and Shine._”

Collection.

Prayer.

Benediction.

       *       *       *       *       *


TEMPERANCE WORK IN CHURCHES.

BY REV. JOS. E. ROY, D.D.

Our Churches, Conferences and Associations are practically
temperance societies. Many of the churches have distinctive rules
requiring abstinence from the use as a beverage, and from the
selling, of intoxicating drinks. As new churches are organized they
are more and more inclined to start with a special, stringent rule.
Other churches interpret, as requiring the same, the common law
of their covenant, by which the members “promise to walk with the
disciples in love, and denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts,
to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world.” All
hold temperance as an article of their faith, expect to have it
faithfully preached in their pulpits, and undertake to exercise
discipline on that principle.

In connection with many of our churches, Bands of Hope were early
organized; and these have done great good in bringing up the rising
generation in the way of sobriety. Some of these have shown great
effectiveness and great tenacity of existence. Some have gained
property and have become permanent fountains of blessing.

In the old times the master’s will was a prohibitory law to his
slaves. When that law was repealed, to many liberty seemed to imply
freedom to drink as much whiskey as they pleased. Experience has
been teaching them better. The means used for their moral elevation
have taken effect upon the prevalence of this habit. But still
liquor drinking is the devil’s best hold upon this people. And
so perpetual vigilance is required to meet these satanic wiles,
even within the precincts of the church. But our pastors have been
faithful, and the churches have been ready to respond to right
principle in the execution of discipline. In a rice-swamp region,
where the whiskey shops seem to be the regular attendants of the
old-time churches, standing hard by the same and finding the
Sabbaths their best days of business, our church there has no such
an annex, for it furnishes no such patronage.

In North Carolina, during the great canvass for prohibition in that
State, one of our pastors was surprised to find laxity in principle
and practice among his members on this subject. He took hold of the
matter vigorously. Church meetings were held. Discussion ran high
until stringent rules were enacted and the members brought into
line to vote for the prohibitory law. When that election came off
and the mass of the colored people shamefully joined with the enemy
and voted against the constitutional inhibition, our pastors and
churches were firm and solid on the right side—our pastor at the
Capital being on the State Executive Committee along with the first
citizens of the State and doing valiant service at home and afield
for the reform.

Our Conferences and Associations, at their annual meetings, have
temperance almost as a standing subject for discussions and for
public meetings. An evening is often spent in ten-minute addresses.
In these the laymen prove very effective speakers. These bodies are
diligent in urging upon the churches fidelity as to the preaching,
practice and discipline upon the subject of temperance.

       *       *       *       *       *


HINDRANCES.

BY REV. DANA SHERRILL, SAVANNAH, GA.

The hindrance occasioned by intemperance in connection with
our work, in church and school, differs only in intensity from
similar evil found elsewhere. The social and spiritual atmosphere
is depressing to our work, because of drinking habits. Total
abstainers number less than ten per cent. of our population, all
colors. A well-informed colored man assures me that not one in
a hundred among men between 18 and 45 years of age are, in his
judgment, total abstainers. Of arrests by our city police during
the year 1882, 1,460 were for offenses usually arising more or less
directly from drink, against 538 for all other crimes and 536 for
drunkenness only. Drinking on our field is not yet driven to the
dramshops, but is common in homes. A father is known to drink every
day in the presence of his children. His name is Legion. The shops
are closed in many country places hereaway where there is little
total abstinence. The demijohn is all-present. The way-trains out
of our city are whiskey trains. Of fourteen men in a car with your
missionary recently, twelve drank spirits from one to four times in
an hour.

At present the great majority of influential people are not only
_not_ total abstainers, but by example and often by precept teach
our colored people, who naturally pattern after the ruling class,
that drinking is the correct thing. This is a sample hindrance.
A promising convert was found to be giving intoxicating drink to
wife and children. When remonstrance was made he asked: “How can it
be wrong when my employer, a good church member, makes me pass it
to his guests every day?” It is needless to say that he is still
outside the church.

Here the general church opinion does not demand total abstinence;
in fact, rebels against such a doctrine. Until very recently the
ministers of our colored churches in no case known to me would be
able to enforce anything like total abstinence however earnestly
they might desire so to do. This, then, is the atmosphere in which
your agents and a very small but earnest band of fellow-helpers
are attempting to build churches and schools demanding total
abstinence. An ignorant, but careful mother, said only a few days
since: “I don’t know but I must leave my church and come over to
you, there is no other temperance church here.” This after one
of our usual monthly total abstinence meetings, and she added as
reason, “I never knew drunkards could not go to heaven before.”
Standing, then, as our church has, as the only religious society
refusing continued membership to drinking men and women, and that
in the presence of the spirit and customs named, it is not strange
that we have been opposed by the uninstructed as interfering with
their liberties, and righteous over much. One at least of our small
churches finds the “social unions” and similar societies, which are
very numerous, almost breaking up their Sabbath service once each
month. The charm in these society meetings is the _wine provided_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE TEMPERANCE OUTLOOK AT MEMPHIS.

BY PROF. A. J. STEELE.

“It was in evidence to-day that Marianna’s place was going full
blast all day Sunday last, and that it was crowded with men and
boys, some of them not more than twelve years old, shooting dice
and playing cards. The specific charges against him were keeping
house open, selling liquor on that day, and allowing minors to
gamble.”

The above item, taken from a late daily paper of this city, may
serve to introduce my observations in the matter of temperance—or
rather of intemperance—for the ten years of my life at Memphis. The
place above referred to is prominently located, rather to one side
of the business portion of the city, and almost literally within
the very shadows of two of the largest colored churches of the
city. If there exists now in Memphis any distinctively temperance
organization other than the W. C. T. U. and the Band of Hope of
Le Moyne Institute, I can find nothing of it. If the churches
speak with other than very uncertain tones on the subject, when
they speak at all, I am not aware of it. I know of but one church,
the Second Congregational, that makes abstinence a condition of
membership. I know of many whose members may and do drink steadily,
sometimes to drunkenness, unmolested. If there is any practical or
emphatic or systematic teaching in Sunday-schools in general on the
subject, I have not known of it. Strangely enough, our strongest,
most effective temperance sentiment and teaching comes through
the courts, and through business men and interests, where in the
majority of cases no moral responsibility or solicitude is felt or
expressed in the matter in question.

The legal argument and phase of the subject is the one that most
readily finds a hearing and a following here; this was recently
shown by the marked interest manifested in several able addresses
given on the subject by Mrs. Foster, the lawyer-temperance
advocate of Iowa. In the South, at all events, there is no doubt
as to the _right_ or _power_ of legislative bodies and courts to
deal with the matter. By a curious mistake some years since the
General Assembly of Tennessee passed a law known as the “Four Mile
Law,” which prohibits the sale of liquor within four miles of any
chartered institution of learning. It was supposed that the law
would be of only local force, but it so happened that the State
Constitution declared that any general act of the Legislature must
be of general application throughout the State. Hence in time we
came to realize that we had a very effective prohibitory law, or
what amounted to that. To the everlasting honor of our courts it
must be said that this and such other temperance legislation as we
have is fearlessly enforced and under very severe penalties in such
cases as are presented for trial.

This is, to say the least, a very anomalous condition of affairs.
I account for it in two ways, chiefly from the fact that in
general the liquor interests of the South are poorly organized
and consolidated for any purposes of opposition or defense;
and secondly, in communities where the formative process is
largely going on—(and be assured the new South will not be the
old)—especially in all questions of public import, the _heroic_ is
oftener resorted to than is just common or fashionable in a more
settled state of society. There is less allowing of quibbles and
more coming straight to the end in view. So stringently have the
courts applied these laws that there are several counties in East
Tennessee where no liquor is now sold.

In this county many country liquor stores have been run out, a
fine of $150 being not unusual for a first offense in violation
of law; this was the fine inflicted in the instance at the head
of this letter. In general the newspapers cast their influence on
the right side; usually edited by men of position and at least
of local importance, their influence is not small. In Memphis
the W. C. T. U. is the strong moral force for temperance work
and influence. Concerning our own work, Colman’s Temperance text
book, is regularly used and taught in the school, and almost
invariably our students go out earnest believers in, and workers
for, temperance, accomplishing no small amount of good among their
people, who almost universally suppose liquor necessary to laborers
and indispensable to _free men_, and therefore drink as much of it
as can be obtained.

       *       *       *       *       *


TEMPERANCE IN TEXAS.

BY PRES. WM. E. BROOKS, TILLOTSON INSTITUTE.

It may be said with truth, I think, that the strongest temperance
element in the State of Texas to-day is among the colored people.
I am informed that where they are in the majority, and they have
an opportunity to express themselves, they vote for prohibition.
There are exceptions. They are very apt to be North or South. If we
can believe Milton, there was one in heaven once. The _excepting_
member, however, found it to his advantage to leave, if I remember
correctly. They say he came to earth. We must not wonder,
therefore, if he has some slight following among the colored people
on the whiskey question; but if they had the say, they would
largely be for prohibition.

Take it here at Tillotson, we have a large and flourishing society,
the members of which are pledged to total abstinence from the use
of intoxicating drinks, and of tobacco. This pledge was adopted
more than a year ago, after a prolonged discussion, but nearly
all the students are now enthusiastic members of the society. The
meetings are held on the third Sabbath evening of each month. They
are full of interest and well attended. But this, like all good
things, is the result of effort. A committee, appointed for this
purpose, has at each meeting a well-filled programme. The more
advanced students have essays upon some phase of the temperance
work; others read articles bearing on the special subject before
the meeting. Thus, at one time, the object is to make manifest the
ill effect of rum and tobacco upon the human system; at another
the cost; the whole interspersed with appropriate music, reading
the Scripture and prayer. In this way there is variety, increase
of light, and the building up of a strong, because intelligent,
opposition to intemperance. And all this is under the direction
of the students. Of course the faculty is present, to do or say
any thing that may be helpful, but the real work is done by the
students, and these meetings are not only full of interest but
reflect great credit on those that have them in charge.

We are thus training up a noble band of young men and women,
whose influence is sure to be felt far and wide, and to become a
great and, I trust, controlling power in Texas, especially among
the colored people. This is our aim, and that our hope shall be
realized, we are confident, since God is in the work.

Thus it can be seen that the great rising tide of temperance, which
is sweeping over the North and Northwest, is making itself felt
here. Not strongly yet, but there is an underswell, a movement
among the more thoughtful, a shrinking back from the wasting,
impoverishing curse of strong drink, and from the filth and fume
of tobacco, which indicates, more clearly than words can, that
the day is close at hand, when the question of temperance, even
of prohibition, will become a living, and (may we not hope?) a
life-saving and a life-imparting issue here in this great, grand,
empire State.

       *       *       *       *       *


TOUGALOO AND TEMPERANCE.

BY REV. A. HATCH, TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

Within the last four or five years, the temperance question has in
one form or another been brought before the people of Mississippi
with some prominence. The revised code is emphatic in the following
points: the sale of vinous or spirituous liquor is forbidden
except under a license, at least two hundred dollars; the sale to
minors is strictly prohibited under severe penalties; the sale of
liquor on Sunday is made unlawful, as also is the keeping open on
that day of the bar or place where liquors are sold. Two years
ago a State temperance convention was called at Jackson. This was
an intelligent body of men representing nearly every county in
the state. It adjourned without accomplishing a great deal, but
the animus of the body was strongly in favor of a constitutional
prohibitory amendment. Being an initiative movement, however, on
the ground of expediency the final action was conservative.

As everywhere, the liquor men are active and shrewd, gaining over
to their side many an ignorant and unwary voter. Their strong
point of influence with the colored people is connected with the
attachment of the latter to the free public school system. No
institution is more fondly cherished by any class of people in
our land than the free school system of the South by the negro
race. The State constitution provides that “all moneys received
for licenses granted for the sale of intoxicating liquor” shall
be applied toward a common school fund. The schools, indeed, are
in large part supported by this means. Liquor men accordingly put
the case thus: Prohibit the manufacture and sale of liquor in this
State and you cut off the support of the common schools.

In one county in the State the sale of intoxicating drinks is
entirely prohibited by the local authorities, and there is at
least one town outside of that county under a like restraint.
At the present time there is very little doing for the cause
throughout the State. It does not as yet enter into the sphere of
politics, unless prospectively in slight degree. Nothing is seen
in the leading papers relative to the subject as a matter of State
interest. Occasionally we hear of a lecturer speaking for the
cause, or rarely of some local movement in the way of organized
effort.

The foregoing is believed to be a fair representation of the public
mind and movement in relation to the subject. In general the
colored people are easily influenced in favor of temperance. They
are ready for the work as grain for the harvest.

There is need of the most earnest work. Of the 876 convicts in the
State penitentiary, according to the last official report, 782 are
colored persons, and it is estimated that four-fifths of these
committed their crimes under the influence of liquor. This fact in
the criminal list is a sure index of what is generally prevalent.
Intemperance is alarmingly widespread among the colored people
in Mississippi. The habit, too, is fixed within the churches of
this people to a shocking extent. Church membership is no sort of
guarantee that an individual is not habitually intemperate, even
to the degree of drunkenness. When we consider all this and the
terrible, degrading influence resting over the children and youth,
the need of specifically _temperance work_ seems almost equal to
that of Christian education.

What has been done in this direction by Tougaloo University through
its teachers, we take great pride and satisfaction in looking over
and summing up. During the past five years this institution has
been represented in temperance work in the State by no less than
150 different individuals converted to the cause while here, and
becoming themselves signers of the pledge to total abstinence.
These have done their temperance work in connection with the
teaching of children in the common schools, and many of them in
various fields. The little army has thus been able to reach a very
great number of children and parents and homes. Their work was
very direct. They taught the principles of temperance, and had
their total abstinence pledge for young and old to sign. Nor was
this all. All of these workers felt the necessity of exercising
from year to year as they returned to their old places, or as
circumstances made it possible, a watchful care over those induced
to sign. One year the total number of signers obtained by our
students was not less than 1,300. But this does not include the
whole of the work done. Many of our students not as yet teachers
have been energetic in their efforts to bring the subject to the
attention of friends and neighbors where they have lived and to
win these over to the cause, often gaining a greater influence and
success than many who worked as teachers.

[Illustration: NEGRO CABINS.]

       *       *       *       *       *


“HIGHER LAW” AND INDIVIDUAL RIGHT ON OUR SIDE.

BY REV. E. T. HOOKER, CHARLESTON.

South Carolina has the _license_ system, with the _local option_
attachment. One-third of the voters in any municipality may require
the question of prohibition to be submitted to the people, and a
majority prohibits. But the legislature last winter went further
than this, and in a truly paternal manner “exempted” certain towns
from the necessity of a majority for prohibition, and gave it to
a large but defeated minority. As the State power is now in the
hands of the white Democrats, it may be inferred from this action
what their temperance sentiments are, in those towns and in the
Legislature. It was a jewel of consistency also in those who now
“make no bones” of confessing, that a minority “had to” take the
government from the (colored) majority a few years ago. It was the
_summum jus_ made legal in spite of republican principles—and was
opposed on that ground by some—which is perhaps symptomatic of
certain peculiarities of the South Carolina people, that have not
always pleased the rest of the country so well. But we will not
quarrel with them this time.

Also the tendency is to make licenses high and higher. They cost
$225 in Charleston, and it has been proposed to raise the figure
thirty per cent.

A daily reader of the _News and Courier_ is almost constantly
seeing instances, noticed with approval, of the success of the
local option law, with such headings as “Greenville doesn’t want
any in her’s.” “Sumter will go dry.” And to-day’s paper, March 21,
states that “the W. C. T. U. has induced several of the teachers
in Spartanburg, [where are the school board? We are a free country
down here, after all.] to introduce text books on temperance. The
cause is having a boom in S.

Mrs. L. Chapin, of Charleston, is President of the Union; and not
long ago they held a busy and thronged session of days, in the hall
of our aristocratic military company in this city. The delegates
from abroad were not wined, but dined and fêted, shown the harbor
and the forts by our city worthies, all with great cordiality and
éclat. More recently still, Hibernian Hall has been twice filled,
as seldom for any political cause, once to hear Miss F. E. Willard,
and, since her visit, Mrs. Foster. Messrs. Stearns and Mead are
coming next week from a busy campaign south and west of us, to hold
two meetings in two of the largest colored churches, and will have
big crowds.

Nearly every grocery in Charleston is also a liquor store; but few
keep bars; and the saloons proper are not numerous. This shows
that most of the drinking is in a domestic and quiet way, and
not on an empty stomach, _standing up_. Beer is not sold in such
large proportion as in Northern cities, but distilled or fermented
liquors, and beer carts are not absent. There is yet a “smart
chance” of illicit distilling in the up-country, and of unlicensed
selling in the backwoods.

On public days not much intoxication is visible. Christmas, also
observed with heathen fire crackers, is the day of greatest
indulgence in firewater, especially among the blacks. But it is
said that the colored men very seldom become drunkards. Their
drinking is occasional rather than habitual, and when intoxicated
they are not combative, but weak and nerveless, or garrulous; while
the up-country man (white), when in liquor, with or without his
pistol, is bellicose in the extreme.

An incident is in place here, which may be called the last spark
of light in the morally dark closing hours of the late House of
Representatives at Washington. It relates to both the colored race
here and the temperance interest.

Sam Lee, a colored man, of good character it may be inferred,
partly from the fact that the _News and Courier_ has not loaded
him with obloquy, true or false, had been for two years contesting
the seat occupied by one Richardson, who, it was voted in the last
hours of that dubious session, was not the choice of his district,
but Lee was. The long-pending whiskey bill, virtually giving
millions from the United States Treasury to the lobby, who had
pushed it through the Senate, was the next thing on the calendar. A
formality remained to be accomplished giving Lee actual possession
of his seat and pay. Over this the Democrats were filibustering,
when the whiskey lobby offered Lee $15,000 to withdraw his claim
and permit their bill to come on, which they had reason to expect
would pass. But, no! He would stand for his right and _the_ right,
and thus did more good for the temperance cause in his few moments
of legal, but unpaid, membership of the House, than possibly he
might have done in a long session, for that or any other cause. The
fact is worth preserving, to the praise of a mighty Providence,
that used that Sabbath morning to defeat one grand move of Satan,
and by means of a colored man from South Carolina, sticking to a
right which he would not exchange for whiskey money.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES AT THE ALABAMA STATE SUNDAY-SCHOOL CONVENTION, MARCH 23.

BY REV. A. W. CURTIS, MARION.

At Alabama Furnace, there is much interest on temperance in the
Sunday-School, and frequent talks on the subject in church.

Mobile. Temperance organization growing, also the sentiment against
the use of tobacco.

Shelby Iron Works. Temperance society doing well. Whiskey has been
driven out of the beat for nearly a year.

The Cove. There is a temperance society of 46 members. The children
have turned their backs on strong drink, tobacco and snuff.

King’s Chapel has a temperance society of 34 members, and is
struggling against whiskey, but so many love it that the fight goes
hard.

Childersburg. Rev. A. Jones had his church burned after giving a
temperance lecture, but instead of surrendering, his people have
rallied and they are building better than before.

At Lawson, the pastor has preached against liquor drinking, but
can do very little to stay the tide. There is a vast deal of
drunkenness. Men will buy whiskey first, meat and bread afterwards
if there is money enough for both.

At Marion, there is a regular temperance catechising in the
day-school against rum and tobacco, also in the three mission
Sunday-schools, frequent preaching on the subject, and mass
meetings alternating at the different churches for free discussion
for some weeks before Christmas.

Montgomery. Doing thorough work in temperance, especially in the
Sunday-school, using the Careful Builders and other literature of
Dr. Cook’s temperance library. The same is true of Selma where they
are also putting in strong licks for temperance in the Burrell
day-school. Here, too, temperance concerts and recitations are
frequent.

Talladega. Their Union Temperance Society holds monthly meetings
full of interest. All of the Sunday-school and all the college
students are members, many of the students going out into the
neighboring beats to lecture. They keep the work lively among
all their mission schools. Next August comes the test vote for
prohibition.

       *       *       *       *       *


TEMPERANCE AMONG OUR CHINESE.

REV. W. C. POND.

The Chinese have never patronized to any appreciable extent the
saloons of California. It is shrewdly suspected that this is the
very front of their offending. If the money these laborers earned
went into the tills of our liquor dealers, the conventions these
liquor dealers so largely control would look at the laborers
themselves with different eyes. But a Chinaman asked to drink
replies (so the story goes): “Me no drinkee whiskee. Make one
Chinaman allee same Melican, No. 1 fool.”

[Illustration: HOODLUMS AT STREET CORNER, SAN FRANCISCO]

I think, however, that American civilization is at last making
itself felt among our Chinese, for I believe that I have passed, in
this city, one small saloon where a Chinaman stood behind the bar,
and some of his countrymen in front of it. I never saw a Chinaman
drunk, though I have heard that the sight might be seen. But this,
too, is recent, and my impression of the aversion to intoxicating
drinks, as a national characteristic, was, till lately, so strong,
that for many years I had nothing to say to our Christian Chinese
on the subject, except as it came up incidentally in the course
of Bible study. It is within a year that it came to my knowledge
that a stimulating and slightly intoxicating drink, which they
call in English, wine, is made from rice, and used among them
more or less at banquets, though not, I think, at ordinary meals.
The discovery of this fact, and that even our most advanced and
reliable Christians were not total abstainers, has led us to preach
among them this gospel also. It has been readily accepted. The
duty, under _our_ circumstances, of _total_ abstinence seems to
be understood, and duty understood becomes, I believe, with these
brethren, unquestioned law.

Respecting opium, the voice of the mission has from the first been
clear, positive and unmistakable. I cannot claim that we have
reached many who had become addicted to this vice; indeed, I cannot
now recall one among those whom I have baptized who had used the
drug enough to make it hard to do without it. Generally I have been
told that they have never used it at all. It ought perhaps to be
a shame to us that we have not reached and rescued slaves to this
vice. Certainly, if any door should open by which an effectual work
of this sort could be set forward, it ought to be entered upon with
intensest zeal. But the most that we have seen it possible to do
thus far has been to pledge all who come into our Congregational
Association of Christian Chinese, not to gamble and not to use
opium. These are the items of external conduct upon which special
emphasis is laid. A brother overtaken in either of these faults
would be dealt with at once in a discipline, the chief danger of
which would be that it might be too prompt and too severe: a zeal
to make the protest of the brotherhood against the sin decisive
and unmistakable preventing due patience and long suffering in the
effort to “restore” and “gain” the erring one.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


SEQUEL TO TED’S TEMPERANCE SOCIETY.

BY MRS. THOS. N. CHASE.

Now, children, I shouldn’t a bit wonder if some of you remember a
story about Ted’s Temperance Society written for the Children’s
Page a year ago. If you have the Missionary for June, 1882, just
read it again, then you will enjoy this story better. Ted, you
remember, was a real live Atlanta boy, ten years old, who got his
school-mates to come to his home to sign a pledge. Ted’s mother
often helped him in making the children who came fully understand
what a solemn thing they were doing. She read the pledge very
slowly to each. Then she had them sign their names on a little
card, and some other child must put down another name underneath
as a witness. This was all there was to the Society, so simple
and easy that any child could do it, no bands, badges, banners or
prizes, yet they were so interested that they came in scores to
enroll their names, and the best of all was, that many who signed
seemed to catch Ted’s missionary zeal, and became centres of little
circles which they drew into Ted’s home, to help swell the noble
army marching against the cruel old despots, tobacco and whiskey.

One little fellow, who had brought many before, came one day with
an overgrown girl of fifteen, and finding several new boys in
the house ready to take the pledge, he felt the dignity of the
situation and tried to help Ted’s mother in her little sermon by
shouting: “Now, boys, this is a good thing if you only mean to keep
it, but it don’t do to put your name down here for a form or a
fashion.”

I recently met dashing little Susie Hall. I knew her as one of the
head centres of those temperance circles. How her black eyes danced
as she told me of her contempt for mince-pies, egg-nog, etc. Few
Southern cooks know how to make mince-pies without brandy. I asked
Susie who gave her the egg-nog she told me of refusing so bravely.
“Oh, ma cooks for white folks and we lives in the yard, and on
Christmas the white lady called me to scrape out the bowl, but I
couldn’t touch it.”

I have just come in from a visit to the Gate City Grammar School,
an eight room city school for colored children, all the teachers
being former students of Atlanta University. I noticed upon the
wall of each room, as soon as I entered a sheet of fools-cap with
names written upon it. For a border it had the beautiful rainbow
pasting which the children in the Storrs Kindergarten make. As
the brilliant setting of those names caught my eye, I supposed
it was some roll of honor, and so it was, but it seemed to me an
enrollment of honor far greater than that given for perfection
in scholarship or school deportment. This is the heading. “We,
the undersigned, do promise not to drink, or ask others to drink,
any wine, cider, whiskey, beer, egg-nog, or anything that can
intoxicate, from this day, Dec. 18, 1882, to Feb. 1, 1883.” From
Dec. 18, to Feb. 1, is only six weeks to be sure, so this is only
a bridge-pledge to bridge over that awful chasm which yawns and
buries so many during those fearful days of the old and new year
when we honor the birthday of the Christ-child, and which ought to
be the purest of all the year. If the children get safely through
these feasting days of egg-nog, brandy-peaches, and syllabubs, they
are pretty safe the rest of the year.

    “Weary watching, wave on wave,
    But still the tide heaves onward.”

Ted’s Society has a growing mission. I take courage as I think of
Hale’s beautiful story, “Ten Times One is Ten,” and see how easily
these children can carry on a grand temperance work, and

    “Look up and not down,
    Look out and not in,”
    If somebody would only
    “Lend a hand.”

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR MARCH, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $935.95.

    Bluehill. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Freight_              $2.00
    Brewer. Dea. John Holyoke, to const. NATHAN H.
      HARRIMAN L. M.                                          30.00
    Brunswick. Young Ladies’ Miss. Soc, by Miss
      Edith J. Boardman, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Castine. Mrs. Lucy S. Adams, to const.
      ROLASTON WOODBURY L. M.                                 30.00
    Falmouth. A. N. Ward                                       5.00
    Falmouth. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., 5 _for
      Freight, for Selma, Ala._                                5.00
    Farmington. Hiram Holt                                   150.00
    Garland. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Gorham. Ladies of Maine, by Miss M. E. Smith,
      _for Lady Missionaries, Wilmington, N.C.,
      and Selma, Ala._                                       543.89
    Gorham. Bbl. of C., 2 _for Freight_; Mrs.
      Truesdale, 5 _for Selma, Ala._                           7.00
    Hallowell. Mrs. H. K. Baker                                5.00
    Hermon. Mrs. M. A. Peabody, from pocket of a
      deceased young lady                                      1.00
    Lyman. Cong. Ch.                                          12.37
    Machias. Centre St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     6.21
    New Gloucester. Cong. Ch.                                 71.00
    New Gloucester. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              10.00
    Orono. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                     1.64
    South Berwick. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
      C., _for Wilmington, N.C._
    South Paris. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            7.00
    Yarmouth. Central Ch.                                     15.84
    Washington. Miss A. L. McDowell, _for Selma,
      Ala._                                                    1.00
    Weld. Rev. D. D. Tappan                                    3.00
    Windham. Cong. Ch.                                        14.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $1,590.17.

    Amherst. L. and L. K. Melendy                            500.00
    Antrim. “A Friend”                                         5.00
    Bennington. Cong. Ch.                                     11.00
    Brentwood. Cong. Ch.                                       6.00
    Candia Village. Jona. Martin                               5.00
    Concord. “A Friend”                                        1.00
    Exeter. 2 Bbls. C., _for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst._
    Lancaster. Mrs. A. M. Amsden                               4.50
    Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                           37.05
    Marlborough. Cong. Ch.                                    14.62
    Portsmouth. Rev. W. W. Dow, _for Tillotson C.
      & N. Inst._                                              1.00
    Wilton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., Bbl of C., _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Wolfborough. Rev. S. Clark                                 5.00
                                                            -------
                                                            $590.17

    LEGACY.

    Concord. Estate of Maria P. Woods, by Dutton
      Woods, Ex.                                           1,000.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,590.17


  VERMONT, $328.87.

    Berlin. Cong. Ch.                                         11.46
    Brattleborough. E. Crosby & Co., 25 _for
      Student Aid_; Ladies of Center Cong Ch. and
      Soc., 3 bbls. C. and 6.50 _for Freight, for
      Talladega C._                                           31.50
    Cambridge. Madison Safford, 5; John Kinsley,
      5; bal. to const. HARMON MORSE L. M.                    10.00
    Charlotte. Nettie A. Parker                               25.00
    East Poultney. A. D. Wilcox                               10.00
    Fair Haven. Cong. Ch.                                     22.33
    Middlebury. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., 19.50; “A. G.
      S.”, 5                                                  24.50
    Morrisville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           13.25
    North Bennington. Cong. Ch.                               10.49
    Northfield. Cong. Ch.                                     12.75
    North Ferrisburg. Cyrus W. Wicker, to const.
      Miss ALICE H. WICKER, L. M.                             30.00
    Quechee. Cong. Ch.                                        24.22
    Saint Johnsbury. South Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Sab.
      Sch. Work_                                              60.00
    Saint Johnsbury. E. & T. Fairbanks & Co.,
      Scales, value $55, _for Atlanta U._
    Saxton’s River. Rev. Wm. Sewall, Box C.
    Wallingford. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Lady
      Missionary, Savannah, Ga._                              15.00
    West Charleston. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
    Weston. Mrs. S. A. Sprague and Miss L. P.
      Bartlett, In memory of their father, Jotham
      Bartlett                                                 8.00
    West Rutland. Cong. Ch.                                   15.37


  MASSACHUSETTS, $5,325.93.

    Andover. South Cong. Ch., 104.07; West Parish
      Cong. Soc., 50                                         154.07
    Amherst. North Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MRS. GEORGE A. WAITE, MRS. LIZZIE PRESTON L.
      Ms.                                                     60.00
    Amherst. W. N. Scott, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Amherst. Mrs. Dutton, 5; Mary H. Scott, 3.20,
      for _Tougaloo U._                                        8.20
    Arlington. Cong. Ch.                                      40.00
    Athol. Evan. Ch. and Soc. to const. THOMAS
      BABBITT L. M.                                           50.17
    Attleborough. Second Cong. Ch. to const JOB B.
      SAVERY and JAMES G. TRAFTON L. Ms.                      55.00
    Auburn. —— to const. MRS. MARY I. RICH L. M.              30.00
    Bedford. Cong. Ch. _for Mobile, Ala._                     14.00
    Boston. Old South Ch. and Soc., 345.39; Mrs.
      E. C. Parkhurst, 20                                    365.39
    Boston. H. S. Burdett, 50; C. H. Haskell, 25;
      J. A. Lane, 25, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             100.00
    Boston. Mrs. C. A. Spaulding, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      50.00
    Boston. “Mrs. O.,” _for Washington, D.C._                  4.00
    Boston. Ladies’ Bbl. of C., 1.10 _for Freight,
      for Wilmington, N.C._                                    1.10
    Braintree. Collected by Rev. Asa Mann, First
      Parish, 2 Bbls. Books and Papers
    Brockton. Mrs. B. Sanford, _Freight_                       2.00
    Brookline. “A Friend.”                                    20.00
    Cambridgeport. Prospect St. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              15.00
    Chelmsford. Rev. C. C. Torrey                             10.00
    Chicopee Falls. Belcher & Taylor, Farming
      implements, val. 36.75; John R. Whitmore,
      Corn-stalk cutter, val. 9.; B. & J. W.
      Belcher, Hay and Straw Cutter, val. 9; Lamb
      Knitting Machine Co., Knitting machine, Val.
      75, _for Atlanta U._
    Conway. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 20; Mrs. Austin
      Rice, 20                                                40.00
    Curtisville. Rev. A. G. B.                                 0.50
    East Boston. Maverick Ch. Sab. Sch. _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    East Douglas. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const.
      WILLIAM D. DANA L. M.                                   39.47
    Easthampton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     49.69
    East Hawley. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               8.25
    East Somerville. Franklin St. Ch., Aux. of
      Ladies H. M. Soc., 55; Cong. Ch. Bbl. C.;
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              55.00
    Foxborough. Evan. Cong. Ch.                               43.23
    Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      33.00
    Granby. Sab. Sch. Class, by Mrs. John Church,
      _for Chinese M._                                        13.00
    Haverhill. Eben Webster’s S. S. Class, West
      Cong. Ch., 9.83; J. Flanders, 1                         10.83
    Hingham. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                   6.90
    Holbrook. Bbl. and Box, _for Macon, Ga._
    Holyoke. Parsons Paper Co., Forty reams note
      paper, val. 34, _for Atlanta U._
    Hubbardston. “Steadfast Friend”                            2.00
    Hyde Park. Cong. Ch.                                      37.12
    Leicester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       65.20
    Leominster. Orthodox Cong. Ch., 12.45; A. D. T., 5        17.45
    Lowell. “A Friend” (100 of which _for Chinese
      M._, and to const. GEORGE G. CLARK L. M.)              200.00
    Malden. Mrs. E. M. Wellman, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Mansfield. Orthodox Cong. Ch.                             11.38
    Medfield. “A Friend,” Knitting Machine, _for
      Industrial Dept._
    Methuen. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Newbury. First Ch.                                        16.38
    Newburyport. Miss S. E. Teel, 5; Jos.
      Danforth, _Freight_, 3                                   8.00
    Newburyport. North Ch. S. S. Class, _for
      Washington, D.C._                                        2.00
    New Bedford. Mrs. M. L. F. Bartlett, to const.
      MISS ELLEN M. HORTON L. M.                              30.00
    Newtonville. Mrs. J. W. Hayes                             25.00
    Northampton. Edwards Ch. (5 of which _for
      Chinese M._)                                            86.66
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                   34.78
    Pittsfield. “Friends,” Box of C. and Roll of
      Curtains, val. 29; Mrs. H. M. Hurd, 3, _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                                3.00
    Plymouth. Ch. of the Pilgrimage                           80.52
    Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                   28.00
    Royalston. Ladies of Cong. Ch. Bbl. Clothing,
      _for Talladega, Ala._
    Salem. “S. O. D.”                                          3.00
    Shelburne. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Soc., Bbl.
      C., _for Savannah Ga._
    Shelburne Falls. E. Maynard                               10.00
    Somerville. Cong. Ch.                                     10.33
    South Abington. Cong. Ch.                                 38.00
    Southbridge. Cong. Ch.                                    26.85
    Southbridge. “A Friend,” _for Chinese M._                  4.50
    South Dennis. “Thank offering of a Friend”                 1.00
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                  21.64
    South Egremont. “A Friend” to const. EDWARD C.
      WOOSTER L. M.                                           30.00
    South Framingham. G. M. Amsden                             4.50
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. (3
      of which from Mrs. P. H. Tirrell’s Sab. Sch.
      class) to const. ORAN P. SHAW and JOHN G.
      HUTCHINS L. Ms.                                         54.00
    Spencer. Primary Dept. Cong. S. S., Bundle S.
      S. papers
    Springfield. “H. M.”                                     500.00
    Sunderland. Cong. S. S., Mary Warner’s Class,
      _for Mobile, Ala._                                       3.00
    Walpole. Mrs. C. F. Metcalf                                1.00
    Watertown. Collected by Mrs. C. L. Woodworth,
      4 Bbls. of C., _for Chattanooga, Tenn._
    Wellesley. Bbl. C. and papers, _for
      Washington, D.C._
    West Boylston. “Willing Workers,” Box C., _for
      Atlanta U., 2 Freight_                                   2.00
    Westfield. “A Friend,” _for Straight U._                  10.00
    Westfield. Second Ch. Sab. Sch., Box Singing
      Books
    Westford. Rev. L. Luce                                     2.50
    Westminster. F. Lombard                                    5.00
    Westport. Pacific Un. Sab. Sch.                            1.58
    West Somerville. Cong. Ch.                                 8.00
    Whitinsville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             28.00
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             11.41
    Wilmington. Dea. James Skilton, 15; Mrs. Susan
      Bancroft, 6                                             21.00
    Winchendon. Atlanta Soc., _for freight_                    2.00
    Worcester. Central Ch. and Soc.                           70.83
    Worcester. Primary Sab. Sch. of Piedmont Ch.,
      _for Student Aid Atlanta U._                            30.00
    Worcester. Mrs. E. A. Grosvenor, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           30.00
    Worcester. “Mayflowers,” of Old South Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         25.00
    Worcester. Ladies of Central Ch., by Mrs.
      Simeon Newton, Bbl. of C. and 3 _for
      freight, for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                    3.00
    ——. “A Friend’s Gift”                                     20.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $3,044.43

    LEGACIES.

    Boston. Estate of Rev. H. B. Hooker, D.D., by
      Arthur W. Tufts. (adl.)                                200.00
    Brimfield. Estate of Annis H. Smith, by N. S.
      Hubbard, Ex.                                            90.54
    Cambridge. Estate of Daniel B. Hadley, by
      Daniel Fobes, Books
    Charlton. Estate of Clarissa Case, by Alfred
      E. Fiske, Ex.                                        1,621.59
    Conway. Estate of Dea. John Clark, by Carlos
      Bardwell, Ex.                                          136.00
    Sunderland. Estate of Mrs. Mari. A. Hubbard,
      to const. WILLIAM L. HUBBARD L. M.                      30.00
    Woburn. Estate of Thos. Richardson, by Hiram
      Whitford, Ex.                                          213.37
                                                          ---------
                                                          $5,325.93


  RHODE ISLAND, $221.39.

    Barrington. “The Social Workers,” Bbl. of C.,
      by Mrs. A. E. Smith
    Newport. Rev. T. Thayer, D.D.                             10.00
    Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch.                         211.39


  CONNECTICUT, $1,884.10.

    Ansonia. Cong. Ch., 47.40; Mrs. L. Downs, 5               52.40
    Ashford. W. D. Carpenter, 5; A. Peck, 2                    7.00
    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch., 60, to const. MRS.
      ABIGAIL H. SNOW and MRS. C. H. WILCOX L. Ms;
      “A Friend,” 50                                         110.00
    Bozrah. Cong. Ch., 10; Miss Hannah Maples, 5              15.00
    Canton Centre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          9.19
    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                        34.00
    Colchester. Rev. S. G. Willard, 10; S. P.
      Willard, 10, _for Student Aid, Straight U._             20.00
    Danielsonville. “A Friend”                                 5.00
    Derby. First Cong. Ch.                                     7.40
    Durham. Rev. A. S. Cheesebrough                            5.00
    East Hampton. Dea. Samuel Skinner, 10; Mrs.
      Samuel Skinner, 5, _for Theol. Dept.
      Talladega C._                                           15.00
    East Hartford. Caustich Bros., Hand Seed Drill
      and Cultivator, val., 12, _for Atlanta U._
    East Windsor. Mrs. Sarah L. Wells                          5.00
    Fairfield. First Cong. Ch.                                40.00
    Franklin. “A Friend.” _for Theo. Dept.
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Greenwich. Second Cong. Ch.                               35.07
    Hampton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  11.76
    Hartford. Second Ch. of Christ                           250.00
    Hartford. Mrs. B. M. Parsons (5 of which _for
      Indian and_ 5 _for Chinese M._)                         15.00
    Harwinton. Cong. Ch.                                      44.40
    Huntington. Mrs. Sarah A. Nichols                          2.50
    Kent. First Cong. Soc.                                    14.17
    Killingly. “A Friend,” _for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst._                                                  10.00
    Meriden. Edmund Tuttle, to const. MRS. LAURA
      JANE BROWN L. M.                                        30.00
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                                20.00
    Mystic Bridge. Cong. Ch.                                  15.25
    New Haven. “A Friend,” 5; Rev. S. W. Barnum,
      12 copies “Romanism as It Is.”                           5.00
    New London. First Cong. Ch. 32.05, and First
      Cong. Sab. Sch. 9.75                                    41.80
    New London. “A Friend”                                     1.50
    New London. “Friends” in First Ch. of Christ,
      Box and Bbl. of C., and, 4 freight, _for
      Talladega, Ala._                                         4.00
    Norfolk. “A Friend,”                                      10.00
    North Haven. Cong. Ch., to const. ZERAH L.
      BLAKESLEE and WILLIAM J. VANDOREN, L. Ms.               62.39
    Prospect. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Prospect. Benj. B. Brown. 20, Incorrectly ack.
      in March number from Cong. Ch.
    Putnam. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Straight
      U._                                                     50.00
    Roxbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               14.39
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                       12.32
    South Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                            19.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      31.25
    Wallingford. Mrs. M. Beadle                                1.50
    Waterbury. “A Friend.”                                    10.00
    Washington. “A Friend,”                                    3.00
    West Hartford. Mrs. Sarah W. Boswell, _for
      Dakota M._                                              30.00
    West Suffield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         14.81
    Weston. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Willimantic. Willimantic Linen Co., 6 Pkgs.
      Spool Cotton, _for Macon, Ga._
    Winchester. “A Friend”                                     8.00
    Winthrop. Miss C. Rice, 1.50; Mrs. M. A. J., 50c           2.00
    ——. “Friends,” _for Theo. Dept., Talladega C._             2.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,329.10

    LEGACIES.

    Terryville. Estate of C. R. Williams, by M. H.
      Williams, Admr., _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     55.00
    Waterbury. Estate of Charles Benedict, _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._, by A. S. Chase,
      Adm’r.                                                 500.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,884.10


  NEW YORK, $2,010.50.

    Albany. Dr. Lorenzo Hale, _for Pres. House,
      Talladega_                                              20.00
    Brooklyn. Ch. of the Pilgrims                            781.40
    Brooklyn. Tompkins Av. Cong. Ch., 122.75; Park
      Cong. Ch., 15; “An Old Missionary,” 5                  142.75
    Brooklyn. “Mrs. F.,” 5, “Aunt Patience,”
      Bundle Basted Patchwork, _for Washington
      D.C._                                                    5.00
    Buffalo. First Cong. Ch. (“R. W. B.”) to
      const. MRS. FREDERICK HOWARD, MISS LUCIA A.
      DEMOND and MISS ALICE L. NORTON L. Ms.                 100.00
    Clifton Springs. Mrs. Henry L. Chase, _for
      lady Missionary, New Orleans, La._                      20.00
    Essex Co. “A Friend.”                                     50.00
    Flushing. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        13.55
    Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                       40.05
    Goshen. Miss Fannie E. Crane, Bundle of C.
    Griffins Mills. Ladies, by Mrs. Theo. Olden                2.00
    Harpersfield. Cong. Ch., by E. G. Beard, Treas.           36.00
    Jamestown. First Cong. Ch., 18.86 and Sab.
      Ch., 7.28                                               26.14
    Lenox. Cong. Ch.                                          10.32
    Leroy. Delia A. Phillips                                   9.50
    Liverpool. Ladies of Pres. Ch., Bbl. Clothing,
      _for Fisk U._
    Malone. Mrs. Mary K. Wead                                100.00
    Morrisville. Cong. Ch.                                    11.83
    Mount Sinai. Cong. Ch.                                    20.00
    Millville. Henry L’Hommedieu                               3.27
    New York. S. T. Gordon (14 of which _for
      Goliad, Texas_), 264; Gen. C. B. Fisk, 30,
      to const. MISS LAURA A. PARMELEE L. M.; Rev.
      L. H. Cobb, D.D., 10; Mrs. E. Merritt, 10              314.00
    New York. A. S. Barnes, _for Fisk U._                    150.00
    New York. John R. Anderson. Pkg. Books
    New York. Chas. Scribner’s Sons, Pkg. Books,
      _for Lewis High School_
    North Pitcher. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                   1.46
    Norwich. Mrs. R. A. Barber                                15.00
    Oneonta. Mrs. H. C. S. and Mrs. W. McC., 50c. each         1.00
    Oxford. Cong. Ch.                                         12.00
    Sherburne. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                39.13
    Sinclairville. Earl C. Preston                             2.00
    Spencerport. Miss Mary E. Dyer                             5.00
    Syracuse. Rev. Ovid Miner, Box Books
    Tarrytown. “A Friend.”                                    40.00
    Union Springs. Mrs. Mary H. Thomas, _for Lady
      Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                                2.00
    Union Valley. Dr. J. Angel                                 5.00
    West Bloomfield. “Sick Woman,” _for the Sick,
      Mobile, Ala._                                            5.00
    West Bloomfield. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 1.10
    West Stockbridge. Village Cong. Ch.                       26.00


  NEW JERSEY, $229.05.

    Bound Brook. Ladies Home M. Soc., _for Freight_            3.00
    East Orange. Grove St. Cong. Ch.                          51.27
    Newark. C. S. Haines, 30; Mrs. L. I. Seymour, 1           31.00
    Orange Valley. Cong. Ch.                                 143.78


  PENNSYLVANIA, $383.97.

    Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch., 239.47; Mrs.
      James P. Dickerman, by Alfred Walker, 100;
      Mrs. E. H. Evans, 4.50; W. P. Fairbanks, 3;
      Mrs. Sarah P. Fairbanks, 2                             348.97
    Scranton. F. E. NETTLETON, to const. himself L.M.         35.00


  OHIO, $779.15.

    Akron. Cong. Ch., Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Ashtabula. Con. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            6.80
    Atwater. Mrs. Matoon, _for Straight U._                    2.00
    Austinburg. Cong. Ch.                                     18.02
    Burton. Cong. Ch.                                         36.15
    Cincinnati. Boys’ Mission Band of 7th St. Ch.,
      by Mrs. J. B. Leake, Treas.; W. B. M. I.,
      _for Dakota M._                                          9.00
    Cleveland. West Side Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of
      Cong. Ch., 25; Dea. S. H. Sheldon, 25, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              50.00
    Cleveland. Mrs. H. R. Hickox, 10; Rev. H.
      Trautman, 4.50                                          14.50
    Cow Run. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
    Greensburg. Mrs. H. B. Harrington, _for Lady
      Missionary, Macon, Ga._                                  5.00
    Greenwich. “A Friend”                                      1.00
    Gustavus. “Friends,” by Miss Clara Clisbee,
      Bbl. C. and 2 freight, _for Talladega, Ala._             2.00
    Hartford. Mrs. Brockway and daughter, 4.50;
      Sarah P. Bushnell, 2; S. C. Baker, 1;
      Others, 3.10                                            10.60
    Madison. Central Cong. Ch.                               144.40
    Mansfield. Willis M. Sturges, 100; H.
      Wellington, 100                                        200.00
    Maysville. Young Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Cong.
      Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                    15.00
    North Benton. Simon Hartzel                                5.00
    North Monroeville. Bbl. of C., _for Mobile,
      Ala._
    Oberlin. Ladies’ Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Lady Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                     75.00
    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., 56.68; Wm. M. Mead,
      $15                                                     71.68
    Painesville. Y. L. M. Soc., Lake Erie Sem.                20.00
    Springfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., bal. to const.
      REV. GEO E. ALBRECHT L. M.                              20.00
    Wellington. Edward West                                   20.00
    Youngstown. Second Cong. Ch.                               1.00


  ILLINOIS, $985.28.

    Aurora. First Cong. Ch., 30.86; N. L. Janes, 10           40.86
    Aurora. Cong. Sab. Sch., 25; Mrs. Hitchcock,
      1; Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box of C., _for
      Mobile, Ala._                                           26.00
    Chandlerville. Cong. Ch.                                  18.77
    Chicago. H. G. BILLINGS, 100, to const.
      himself, MRS. EMILY A. BILLINGS and
      FREDERICK H. BILLINGS, L. Ms.; First Cong.
      Ch., 105.28; Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of N. E.
      Cong. Ch., 13.61; Lawndale Cong. Ch., 10.34;
      E. Rathbone, 15; N. E. Cong. Ch., 12.58                256.81
    Chicago. C. B. Bouton, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     50.00
    Chicago. Union Park Ch. Y. L. M. Soc., _for
      Dakota M._                                              30.98
    Chicago. South Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Washington, D.C._                                       10.00
    Chicago. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., South Ch., _for
      Lady Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                          10.00
    Dixon. C. A. D.                                            5.00
    Elgin. Mrs. Styles, 1; Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
      Bbl. of C., _for Mobile, Ala._                           1.00
    Elmwood. Cong. Ch., to const. WILLIAM I. PLUMB
      L. M.                                                   31.00
    Galesburg. C. S. Halsey, Case of Medicines,
      &c., _for Talladega C._
    Galva. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Geneseo. “Busy Workers,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Gridley. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc.                               9.00
    Lombard. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. _for
      Mobile, Ala._
    Lyonsville. Cong. Ch.                                     20.00
    Northampton. R. W. Gilliam                                 5.00
    Oak Park. Mrs. Russell, _for Mobile, Ala._                 5.00
    Ontario. Cong. Ch.                                        22.00
    Oswego. “P. Y.”                                            1.00
    Ottawa. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   20.93
    Peoria. Mrs. J. L. Griswold, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                               100.00
    Pullman. “M. P. B.”                                        2.00
    Ross Grove. Cong. Ch.                                     13.00
    Seward. Cong. Ch.                                         35.00
    Seward. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    8.00
    Udina. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                     7.43
    Yorkville. Mrs. H. S. Colton                               1.50
                                                            -------
                                                            $765.28

    LEGACY.

    Chicago. Estate of Harriet B. Whittlesey by
      Wm. H. Bradley and Henry B. Whittlesey, Exs.           220.00
                                                            -------
                                                            $985.28


  MICHIGAN, $547.94.

    Alamo. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc.                                 4.15
    Calumet. Cong. Ch.                                       259.01
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch.                                  26.50
    Clinton. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           13.16
    Clio. Cong. Ch.                                            5.12
    Galesburg. Mrs. Sarah M. Sleeper                           5.00
    Grand Rapids. Park Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev.
      J. H. H. Sengstacke_                                    10.00
    Grand Rapids. E. M. Bail                                  14.50
    Litchfield. Shining Lights Mission Band, _for
      Student Aid, Athens. Ala._                              12.00
    North Lansing. Mary A. Gibson                              2.00
    Saline. Eli Benton                                        40.00
    Saginaw City. Mrs. A. M. Spencer                           2.00
    Somerset. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Union City. Cong. Ch., 112.50, and Sab. Sch.,
      20                                                     132.50
    Vassar. Olive W. Selden                                    2.00


  IOWA, $161.75.

    Central City. Ladies’ Missy. Soc.                         16.00
    Chester Centre. Cong. Ch.                                 35.00
    Council Bluffs. Woman’s Missy. Soc., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              40.00
    Council Bluffs. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid. Talladega C._                                      30.00
    Des Moines. Woman’s Missy. Soc. of Plymouth
      Ch., 30, _for Lady Missionary, New Orleans,
      La._ Incorrectly ack. in April number from
      Grinnell
    Garden Prairie. Cong. Sab. Sch.                            2.75
    Kelley. Cong. Ch.                                          3.00
    Marion. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           10.00
    Mitchellville. M. B. Turner                                5.00
    Monona. Rev. W. S. Potwin, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           15.00
    Wilton Junction. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                       5.00


  WISCONSIN, $96.26.

    Beloit. Y. M. C. A., Beloit College                        6.50
    Beloit. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              30.00
    Beloit. Rev. E. P. Wheeler, Remington Cotton
      and Corn Planter, val. 25., _for Atlanta U._
    Bristol and Paris. Cong. Ch.                              23.00
    Delevan. By Mrs. O. Crosby. 2 Bbls. of C. and
      2.10 Freight, _for Talladega, Ala._                      2.10
    Durand. Lucy E. Kidder, _for Dakota M._                    5.00
    Milton. Cong. Ch.                                          7.01
    Monroe. “Our Family Missionary Box,” 6.50:
      Francis A. Locke, 5                                     11.50
    New Lisbon. Cong. Ch.                                      6.65
    Waukesha. Vernon Tichenor                                  4.50


  MINNESOTA, $377.50.

    Clear Water. Cong. Ch.                                     4.19
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 44.82
    Northfield. Cong. Ch.                                     26.37
    Northfield. Mrs. Knowlton, 10; Mrs. Porter, 5;
      Mrs. Randolph, 1; _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           16.00
    Owatonna. Cong. Ch.                                       14.11
    Zumbrota. First Cong. Ch. to const. HARRY C.
      SARGENT L. M.                                           33.50
    ——. “Friends,” by Mrs. J. B. Leake, Treas. W.
      B. M. I., _for Dakota M._                              238.51


  KANSAS, $3.00.

    Brookville. Rev. S. G. Wright                              3.00


  NEBRASKA, $29.35.

    Beatrice. Mrs. B. F. Hotchkiss                             5.00
    Blair. Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
    Clark’s. Cong. Ch.                                         4.00
    Grafton. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Newland. Cong. Ch.                                         1.74
    Ulysses. Cong. Ch.                                         3.61


  WASHINGTON TER., $17.40.

    Houghton. First Ch. of Christ                              2.00
    Skokomish. Ch. of Christ                                  15.40


  COLORADO, $36.00.

    Colorado Springs. Cong. Ch. Young People’s
      Society, to const. Miss FANNY BROWN L. M.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         30.00
    Longmont. Miss Hettie Ward, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 6.00


  UTAH, $4.00.

    Salt Lake City. Mr. Irwin, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            4.00


  MONTANA, $10.00.

    Fort Logan. Mrs. Jennie K. Lewis                          10.00


  CALIFORNIA, $5.00.

    Los Angeles. L. K. Lorbeer                                 5.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $12.00.

    Washington. Plymouth Cong. Ch., 5; Lincoln
      Mem. Ch., 2                                              7.00
    Washington. “Friend,” _for Washington, D.C._               5.00


  WEST VIRGINIA, $5.

    Charleston. “A Tireless Friend”                            5.00


  KENTUCKY, $208.40.

    Lexington. Tuition                                       107.50
    Williamsburg. Tuition                                    100.90


  TENNESSEE, $379.50.

    Chattanooga. Miss Ida E. Ferrand, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         5.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          220.00
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              154.50


  NORTH CAROLINA, $217.55.

    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition, 212.55;
      First Cong. Ch., 5                                     217.55


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $685.80.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition, 665.80;
      Plymouth Ch., 20                                       685.80


  GEORGIA, $604.60.

    Atlanta. Storr’s Sch., Tuition, 206.72; Rent,
      3; First Cong. Ch., 30.40                              240.12
    Athens. First Cong. Ch.                                    6.00
    Byron. Cong. Ch.                                           2.20
    Macon. Lewis High Sch. Tuition 140.75; Cong.
      Ch., 50.83 bal. to const. Mrs. ARIADNE S.
      SELLERS and EMANUEL HAYES L. Ms.                       191.58
    Macon. Rev. Dr. J. R. Branhan, Pkg. Books; J.
      M. Boardman, Books and Magazines, _for
      Library, Lewis High School_
    McIntosh. Dorchester Academy, Tuition                     11.95
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition 142.75; Rent, 10          152.75


  ALABAMA, $3,418.50.

    Athens. Trinity Sch., Tuition                            106.25
    Marion. Tuition, 7.25; Cong. Ch., 3.50                    10.75
    Mobile. Proceeds Sale of Land                          2,500.00
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition, 436.75; From
      Sale of C., 11.90                                      448.65
    Montgomery. C. W. Buckley, _for President’s
      House, Talladega, Ala._                                100.00
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                         194.65
    Talladega. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Needmore
      Chapel, Talladega, Ala._                                28.20
    Selma. Rev. Mr. Curtis, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           11.00
    Selma. First Cong. Ch.                                     9.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $2,130.31.

    Tougaloo. Pub. Sch. Fund                               2,000.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $105.81; Rent,
      $24.50                                                 130.31


  LOUISIANA, $136.50.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        136.50


  TEXAS, $277.35.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Tuition                 277.35


  INCOMES, $801.75.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               625.41
    C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                        55.41
    General Fund                                              50.00
    John Brown Steamer Fund                                   39.37
    Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._                         26.59
    Luke Memorial Scholarship Fund                             2.33
    Theo. Fund, _for Fisk U._                                  1.49
    Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega C._                      1.15


  CANADA, $1,000.

    ——. “In Memoriam”                                      1,000.00


  ENGLAND, $28.80.

    Sydenham. George Sturge, _for Atlanta U._                 24.00
    Somersett. James Clark, _for Atlanta U._                   4.80


  TURKEY, $10.00.

    Van. Dr. George C. Reynolds                               10.00
                                                        -----------
      Total for March                                    $25,878.62
                                                        -----------
      Total from Oct. 1 to March 31                     $122,621.64
                                                        ===========

         *       *       *       *       *

  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Income Fund                                              172.58
    Previously acknowledged, Oct., 1882                      175.00
                                                            -------
      Total                                                 $347.58

         *       *       *       *       *

  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions                                             95.15
    Previously acknowledged                                  442.59
                                                            -------
      Total                                                 $537.74
                                                            =======

                                      H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                                56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROPOSED CONSTITUTION OF THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


ART. I. This society shall be called the American Missionary
Association.

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Members may be constituted for life by the payment of
thirty dollars into the treasury of the Association, with the
written declaration at the time or times of payment that the sum is
to be applied to constitute a designated person a life member; and
such membership shall begin sixty days after the payment shall have
been completed.

Every church which has within a year contributed to the funds of
the Association and every State Conference or Association of such
churches may appoint two delegates to the Annual Meeting of the
Association; such delegates, duly attested by credentials, shall be
members of the Association for the year for which they were thus
appointed.

ART. IV. The Annual Meeting of the Association shall be held in
the month of October or November, at such time and place as may be
designated by the Executive Committee, by notice printed in the
official publication of the Association for the preceding month.

ART. V. The officers of the Association shall be a President,
five Vice-Presidents, a Corresponding Secretary or Secretaries,
a Recording Secretary, a Treasurer, Auditors, and an Executive
Committee of fifteen members, all of whom shall be elected by
ballot.

At the first Annual Meeting after the adoption of this
Constitution, five members of the Executive Committee shall be
elected for the term of one year, five for two years and five for
three years, and at each subsequent Annual Meeting, five members
shall be elected for the full term of three years, and such others
as shall be required to fill vacancies.

ART. VI. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds, the appointing, counseling, sustaining
and dismissing of missionaries and agents, and the selection of
missionary fields. They shall have authority to fill all vacancies
in office occurring between the Annual Meetings; to apply to any
Legislature for acts of incorporation, or conferring corporate
power; to make provision when necessary for disabled missionaries
and for the widows and children of deceased missionaries, and in
general to transact all such business as usually appertains to the
Executive Committees of missionary and other benevolent societies.
The acts of the Committee shall be subject to the revision of the
Annual Meeting.

Five members of the Committee constitute a quorum for transacting
business.

ART. VII. No person shall be made an officer of this Association
who is not a member of some evangelical church.

ART. VIII. Missionary bodies and churches or individuals may
appoint and sustain missionaries of their own, through the agency
of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. IX. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution except by
the vote of two-thirds of the members present at an Annual Meeting,
the amendment having been approved by the vote of a majority at the
previous Annual Meeting.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                  [Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                     EXHAUSTION. NERVOUSNESS,
                   DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           J. & R. LAMB,

                        59 Carmine Street.

                  Sixth Ave. cars pass the door.

                          [Illustration]

                              BANNERS

                             IN SILK,

                           NEW DESIGNS.

                              CHURCH
                            FURNITURE.

                    SEND FOR HAND BOOK BY MAIL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  PEARLS      IN THE       MOUTH

                          [Illustration]

                       Beauty and Fragrance

                 Are communicated to the mouth by

                             SOZODONT

which renders the _teeth pearly white_, the gums rosy, and the
_breath sweet_. By those who have used it, it is regarded as an
indispensable adjunct of the toilet. It thoroughly _removes tartar_
from the teeth, without injuring the enamel.

                        SOLD BY DRUGGISTS

                            EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          VIOLIN OUTFITS

[Illustration:

  Biggest Bargains
  ever known.

  From
  $1.75
  to
  $25.

☞ SPECIAL BARGAIN.

PAGANINI VIOLIN,]

Celebrated for fine tone, finish. Italian strings, fine pegs,
inlaid pearl tail-piece, fine long bow, with ivory and silvered
frog, in violin box. Book of Instruction, with 558 pieces music,
by express for $3.50. Satisfaction guaranteed, or money refunded.
A better outfit cannot be purchased elsewhere for $10. Send
stamp for large Catalogue. =G. H. W. BATES & CO.=, Importers and
Manufacturers, 106 Sudbury St., Boston, Mass.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                    LIFE INS. CO. OF NEW YORK,

                      _156 and 158 Broadway_.


                        THIRTY-THIRD YEAR.


DESCRIPTION—One of the oldest, strongest, best.

POLICIES—Incontestable, non-forfeitable, definite cash surrender
values.

RATES—Safe, low, and participating or not, as desired.

RISKS carefully selected.

PROMPT, liberal dealing.

GENERAL AGENTS AND CANVASSERS WANTED in desirable territory, to
whom permanent employment and liberal compensation will be given.

Address

  H. STOKES, President.

  H. Y. WEMPLE, Sec’y.
  S. N. STEBBINS, Act’y.
  J. L. HALSEY, 1st V.-P.
  H. B. STOKES, 2d V.-P.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  SMITH
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS]

                           ARE THE BEST.


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY. Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  THE
  POPULAR
  ORGANETTE

  WILL PLAY ANY TUNE
  WITH CHARMING
  EFFECT]

We are the =General Agents= for the United States and Canada
for this wonderful and =First Class= Organette. It is a =reed=
instrument, and is constructed on the same principle as an
organ, with bellows and =full size reeds=. The music consists of
perforated sheets, which are put into the Organette, furnishing
either =finished solo performance, a rich accompaniment to the
voice or valuable orchestral effects=. They are marvels of musical
invention, and combine in themselves all the principles upon which
automatic organs, organettes, etc., are now being made, requiring
no skill in the performer; any child old enough to use its hands
intelligently can play, and the =range of music is absolutely
unlimited=. We wish to introduce one of these Organettes in every
town and hamlet throughout the =United States and Canada=, and in
order to do so =speedily= have concluded to sell a limited number
to the readers of this magazine at =ONLY $5.00= each. This is =much
under the regular price=, and in order to protect ourselves from
persons ordering in large quantities we require you to =cut this
advertisement out= and send to us with your order on or before
=September 1st, 1883=. We will positively not sell more than =one
Organette= to any one person at this reduced price, as we only make
this unprecedented offer to introduce this =first-class Organette=
throughout the world, well knowing that, after one is received in a
neighborhood, we will sell several at =our regular price=.

We wish to caution you against the many =worthless automatic
instruments= being sold =under various names=. We are the =General
Agents= for the =McTammany Organette=, and you must order direct
from us or through our authorized Agents. Remember, the =McTammany
Organettes= are not toys, but are =large and powerful instruments=,
built of =black walnut=, highly polished and decorated in =gold=,
the Reeds being so powerful that they produce sufficient =volume
of music= for the =chapel, parlor or lodge=. There is nothing
about them to get out of order, in fact, they produce a richer
and sweeter sound after having been used for a few years. =For
HOME ENTERTAINMENTS they are unsurpassed.= The cut will give you
but a faint idea of _size and finish_ of this instrument, but we
will return the money and pay express charges to any one who is
not perfectly satisfied after receiving it. With each Organette we
inclose a selection of popular tunes, and pack all in a strong box.
Money can be sent by Registered Letter, Money Order or Draft, or we
will send the Organette by express, C. O. D., with the privilege of
examination before taking out of the express office, if you send
$1, to guarantee us against express charges. If you are in New York
at any time call on us, or if you have friends living here request
them to call and purchase for you. If you wish to act as an agent
for us send to us at once and secure the agency for your town. =You
can easily sell the instruments at $10 to $15 each. Address or call
on=

              H. C. WILKINSON & CO., General Agents,

               195 and 197 Fulton Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


       7 Per Cent. to 8 Per Cent. INTEREST NET to INVESTORS

        In First Mortgage Bonds ON IMPROVED FARMS in Iowa,

                 Minnesota and Dakota, secured by

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

      BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS.       EMMETSBURG, IOWA.

        REFERENCES AND CIRCULARS FORWARDED ON APPLICATION.


                 *       *       *       *       *


  $85.00
  FOR ONLY
  _$51.00_
  Freight
  Prepaid

BEATTY’S PARLOR ORGANS ONLY $51.00

[Illustration: NEW STYLE NO. 1215. Height, 72 ins., Depth, 24 ins.
Length, 49 ins., Weight, boxed, about 400 lbs.]


=Regular Price $85.00= Without Stool, Book and Music.

24 STOPS.

1 Cello, 8 ft. tone. 2 Melodia, 8 ft. tone. 8 Clarabella, 8 ft.
tone. 4 Manual Sub-Bass, 16 ft. tone. 5 Bourdon, 16 ft. tone. 6
Saxaphone, 8 ft. tone. 7 Viol di Gamba, 8 ft. tone. 8 Diapason, 8
ft. tone. 9 Viola Dolce, 4 ft. tone. 10 Grand Expressione, 8 ft.
tone. 11 French Horn, 8 ft. tone. 12 Harp Æolian. 13 Vox Humana.
14 Echo, 8 ft. tone. 15 Dulciana, 8 ft. tone. 16 Clarionet, 8
ft. tone. 17 Voix Celeste, 8 ft. tone. 18 Violina, 4 ft. tone.
19 Vox Jubilante, 8 ft. tone. 20 Piccolo, 4 ft. tone. 21 Coupler
Harmonique. 22 Orchestral Forte. 23 Grand Organ Knee Stop. 24 Right
Organ Knee Stop.

☞ This Organ is a triumph of the organ-builders’ art. IT IS VERY
BEAUTIFUL IN APPEARANCE, BEING EXACTLY LIKE CUT. The Case is solid
Walnut, profusely ornamented with hand-carving and expensive fancy
veneers. The Music Pocket is of the most beautiful design extant.
It is deserving of a place in the millionaire’s parlor, and would
ornament the boudoir of a princess.


=FIVE SETS REEDS.= Five Octaves, handsome appearance. It will not
take the dirt or dust. It contains the Sweet VOIX CELESTE STOP, the
famous French Horn Solo Combination, New Grand Organ Right and Left
Knee Stops, to control the entire motion by the Knee, if necessary.
Five (5) Sets of GOLDEN TONGUE REEDS, as follows: a set of powerful
Sub-Bass Reeds; set of 3 Octaves of VOIX CELESTE; one set of FRENCH
HORN REEDS; and 2 1-2 Octaves each of regular GOLDEN TONGUE REEDS.
Besides all this, it is fitted up with an OCTAVE COUPLER, which
doubles the power of the instrument. Lamp Stands, Pocket for Music,
Beatty’s Patent Stop Action, also Sounding Board, &c., &c. It has
a Sliding Lid and conveniently arranged Handles for moving. The
Bellow which are of the upright pattern, are made from the best
quality of rubber cloth, are of great power, and are fitted up with
steel springs and the best quality of pedal straps. The Pedals,
instead of being covered with carpet, are polished metal, neat
design, never get out of repair or worn.


=SPECIAL TEN-DAY OFFER.= _If you will remit me =$51= and the
annexed Coupon, within =10= days from the date hereof, I will box
and ship you this Organ, with Organ Bench, Book, etc., exactly the
same as I sell for =$85=. You should order immediately, and in no
case later than =10= days. One year’s test trial given and a full
warrantee for Six Years._

[Illustration:

  DANIEL F. BEATTY
  WASHINGTON
  NEW JERSEY
  U.S. AMERICA]

Given under my Hand and Seal this

_1st day of May_, =1883=.

[Illustration: _Daniel F. Beatty_]

  COUPON        $37.

On receipt of this Coupon and =$51= in cash by Bank Draft, Post
Office Money Order, Registered Letter, Express Prepaid, or by Check
on your Bank, if forwarded =within 10 days= from date hereof, I
hereby agree to accept this Coupon for =$37=, as part payment on
my celebrated =24 Stop $85 Parlor Organ=, with Bench, Book, etc.,
providing the cash balance of =$51= accompanies this Coupon, and I
will send you a receipted bill in full for =$85= and box and ship
you the Organ just as it is advertised, fully warranted for Six
years. Money refunded with interest from date of remittance if not
as represented after one year’s use. (Signed) DANIEL F. BEATTY.


=FREIGHT PREPAID.= As a further inducement for you, [provided you
order immediately, within 10 days], =I= agree to prepay freight on
the above organ to your nearest railroad freight station, any point
east of the Mississippi River, or that far on any going west of it.
This is a =rare opportunity= to place an instrument as it were =at
your very door=, all freight prepaid, at =manufacturer’s wholesale
prices. Order now; nothing saved by correspondence=.

=HOW TO ORDER.= Enclosed find =$51.00= for Organ. I have read your
statement in this advertisement and I order one on condition that
is must prove exactly as represented in this advertisement, or I
shall return it at the end of one year’s use and demand the return
of my money, with interest from the very moment I forwarded it,
at six per cent, according to your offer. ☞ =Be very particular
to give Name, Post Office, County, State, Freight Station, and
on what Railroad.= ☞ Be sure to remit by Bank Draft, P. O. Money
Order, Registered Letter, Express prepaid, or by Bank Check. You
many accept by telegraph on last day and remit by mail on that day,
which will secure this special offer. I desire this magnificent
instrument introduced without delay, hence this special price,
PROVIDING ORDER IS GIVEN IMMEDIATELY.

  _Address or call upon_}
  _the Manufacturer_    } =DANIEL F. BEATTY, Washington, New Jersey.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         COMPOUND OXYGEN,

                 FOR THE CURE OF CHRONIC DISEASES.


             “I Almost Forget that I Have Been Sick.”

This is the declaration of a lady in Wellsville, Mo., whose
friends, to use her own words, “had all given up that I was going
with _Consumption_ as fast as I could.” We give her own account of
the marvelous change wrought by Compound Oxygen:

“I was convalescing from a six weeks’ fever when I began using
the Oxygen. Was very much reduced in flesh and strength; could
only sit up a part of the time. Had a slight cough and raised some
matter and phlegm from my lungs. After using the Oxygen one week my
weight was eighty nine and a half pounds; three weeks after it was
ninety-two pounds, a gain of two and a half pounds in three weeks.
I think it has been much faster for the last two weeks.

“I have been using Oxygen for six weeks and am now able to ride to
town, six miles, do my shopping and back again, get dinner for my
family and work at light housework all the remainder of the day
without stopping to rest. Am feeling so strong and well _that I
almost forget I have been sick_ and should think my lungs well if
it were not for the smarting or uneasy feeling in my throat and
some pain between my shoulders at times.

“My cough (when I do cough, which is not often) is much more
satisfactory and less of a hack than it was six weeks ago, and I
think I raise more phlegm and less matter.

“I am able to do my own work, and it is so easy that I find it a
real pleasure. _Appetite is splendid. Sleep seven or eight hours
soundly; no night sweats, no distressing sick headaches, as I
used to have. My friends had all given up that I was going with
Consumption as fast as I could, but instead, I am looking better
than for years_, and I think it is through God’s mercy and His
blessing and your Oxygen that has brought me health and happiness.”


                   “A Wonder to all my Friends.”

A lady at Sandy Creek, N.Y., wrote us in April last, giving a
statement of her case. She had been a sufferer for many years,
especially from _Neuralgia_.

We had but one report of the case, and that a brief one, until
October 20, 1882, when the following was received. It will be seen
that the treatment has been doing a good work, and that the lady,
to use her own words, is “a wonder to all her friends.”

“Last April I procured a Home Treatment from you and have written
you once since then. I have been greatly benefited by the use of
the Oxygen. When I wrote you a description of my case you expressed
the opinion that with freedom from care and work I might be cured
by taking the Treatment. I have never worked so hard or steadily
as through the past summer, _and have not felt so well, so much
alive for years_, and all this from the use _of only about half
a Treatment_. I have been so very busy that I have not taken the
Oxygen regularly at all; neither have I reported to you but once
before, so I could blame no one but myself if I were not benefited.
I have not felt quite as well for the past two weeks, but am
going to be more faithful in the use of the Oxygen, and I hope to
improve. _I am a wonder to all my friends_, but I give the credit
where it is due—to the use of the Oxygen.”


                Strong Testimony from a Physician.

A physician in Troy, Tenn., whose wife was in the early stages of
Consumption, wrote to us in May last, ordering a Treatment. In a
second letter, received some weeks after the Compound Oxygen was
received, he says:

“She coughs some. Has no night sweats. Had some chills lately;
short breath; pain in left lung under breast; some hemorrhage
recently; appetite and sleep moderate; losing flesh since using
Compound Oxygen; is some better in all respects; coughs up some
blood and pure pus; breathes better than before using Compound
Oxygen.”

We did not hear again from the case until Sept. 22, 1882, when a
letter came, in which the writer states that he had been waiting
to see if the good work begun by our Treatment was going to be
permanent. His report, which we give below, is highly satisfactory:

“You will no doubt think that I have been very negligent in writing
you in regard to my wife’s case. Please receive my apology. _I
was just waiting to see if what your Treatment was doing would be
permanent._ I have so much to say that I hardly know where to begin.

“I gave you the symptoms when I made the order. _For the first
three weeks my wife did not improve any. After that time she
improved slowly but steadily. She is now like a new person. She is
gaining all the time. Her breathing is better than for two years,
and she is gaining strength and flesh._

“When she began your Compound Oxygen _she could not walk fifty
yards without great exhaustion_. She can now _walk half a mile with
but little fatigue_. Her lungs pain her but little. She sleeps well
at night; appetite good; has not _had any hemorrhage since last of
July_, and then light; and, to cut the matter short, _she said this
morning that she began to feel like herself again_.

“_You are at liberty to refer to me or my wife any one similarly
affected._”


Our Treatise on Compound Oxygen _is sent free of charge_. It
contains a history of the discovery, nature and action of this new
remedy, and a record of many of the remarkable results which have
so far attended its use.

DEPOSITORY ON PACIFIC COAST.—H. E. Mathews, 606 Montgomery Street,
San Francisco, California, will fill orders for the Compound Oxygen
Treatment on Pacific Coast.


                       DRS. STARKEY & PALEN,

  G. R. STARKEY, A.M., M.D.
  G. E. PALEN, Ph.B., M.D.
  1,109 & 1,111 Girard St. (Bet. Chestnut and Market),
    Philadelphia, Pa.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    MASON & HAMLIN BEST ORGANS

[Illustration:

  PARIS      VIENNA
  1867        1873

  MATCHLESS UNRIVALED. FRANZ LISZT

  A WONDER TO ALL WHO SEE AND TEST IT. ONLY $22.

  PHILAD      MILAN      SANTo
  1876        1881       1875

  THE FINER DRAWING ROOM STYLES ARE UNRIVALED. ONE TO THREE MANUALS;
  TEN TO THIRTY-TWO STOPS. $200. to $600. AND UP.

  POPULAR STYLES No 109; SUFFICIENT COMPASS FOR FULL PARTS OF
  POPULAR MUSIC $22. OTHER STYLES: $30. $57. $72. $78. $93. $108.
  $114. $117. $120. UP FOR CASH. EASY PAYMENTS OR RENTED.

  MUSICIANS GENERALLY REGARD THEM AS UNEQUALED. THEO. THOMAS

  CATALOGUES        FREE

  PARIS      PARIS
  1878       1878

  HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL THE GREAT WORLD’S EXPOSITIONS FOR SIXTEEN
  YEARS

  THE TONES COMBINE SO WELL WITH THE VOICE. CH. GOUNOUD.

   NO INSTRUMENT SO ENRAPTURES THE PLAYER. XAVER SCHARWENKA.

  NORWAY      ONE          SWEDEN
  1878        HUNDRED       1878
              STYLES

  MASON & HAMLIN · ORGAN & PIANO Co BOSTON, 154 TREMONT ST. NEW
  YORK, 46 E 14th ST. CHICAGO, 149 WABASH AVE.]


                 *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Period spellings and author’s grammar have been
retained. Inconsistent hyphenation retained due to the multiplicity
of authors. The following printer’s errors were corrected.

Changed “intoxcating” to “intoxicating” on page 142 (was found to
be giving intoxicating drink).

An unclosed quote on page 147 is left unclosed, as it is uncertain
where the close quote should be (“the W. C. T. U. has induced).

Changed “discusssion” to “discussion” on page 148 (for free
discussion).

Changed “Fragance” to “Fragrance” on page 157 (Beauty and
Fragrance).

       *       *       *       *       *







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 37, NO. 5, MAY, 1883 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.