[Illustration: JULY, 1883.

VOL. XXXVII.

NO. 7.

The American Missionary]




                             CONTENTS


                                                         PAGE.

  EDITORIAL.

    FINANCIAL—SCHOOL ANNIVERSARIES SOUTH                  193
    NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL ASSEMBLY—CONFERENCE OF
      MISSIONARIES                                        194
    MENDI MISSION—JOHN BROWN STEAMER                      195
    GENERAL NOTES                                         196
    INDIAN ENCAMPMENT (cut)                               198
    BENEFACTIONS                                          199


  THE SOUTH.

    ANNIVERSARY REPORTS—HAMPTON INSTITUTE                 200
    FISK UNIVERSITY                                       201
    TALLADEGA COLLEGE                                     203
    STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY                                   204
    TOUGALOO                                              205
    HOWARD UNIVERSITY—WILMINGTON NORMAL SCHOOL            207
    EMERSON INSTITUTE                                     208
    LE MOYNE INSTITUTE                                    209


  THE INDIANS.

    CATHOLIC MISSIONS—RECENT CHANGES                      211


  THE CHINESE.

    ANNIVERSARIES—WORK DURING APRIL AND MAY               212


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    TO THE LADIES OF THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES          213
    MISSION HOMES—LETTER FROM MRS. CHASE                  214
    A MISSION HOME (cut)                                  215
    QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS                                 216


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    ABOUT GIVING PENNIES                                  217


  RECEIPTS                                                218

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:
         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
         Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as
                       second-class matter.




    THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

           *       *       *       *       *


PRESIDENT.

  HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


TREASURER.

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


AUDITORS.

  M. F. READING.
  WM. A. NASH.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN
ABBOTT, ALONZO S. BALL, A. S. BARNES, C. T. CHRISTENSEN, FRANKLIN
FAIRBANKS, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES
A. HULL, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, WM. H. WARD, A. L.
WILLISTON.


DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _Boston_,
  Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
  Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office; letters to the Woman’s Bureau, to Miss D. E. Emerson, 56
Reade Street.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: Estey

Organ

The excellences of the ESTEY ORGAN may not be told in an ordinary
advertisement. Our Illustrated Catalogue, sent free, containing
engravings from photographs of elegant styles, with full
description, is more satisfactory

J:ESTEY & Co BRATTLEBORO VT.]

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXVII.       JULY, 1883.       NO. 7.

                 *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


FINANCIAL.

Our receipts during the eight months of the fiscal year closing May
31 from collections and donations have amounted to $131,434.37.
The collections and donations for the same months last year were
$159,900.45, a decrease of $28,466.08. The legacies for these
months last year were $31,516.63, while for this year they have
been $47,450.24, an increase of $15,933.61. The total receipts
for this year in collections, donations and legacies have been
$178,884.61 against $191,417.08 for the same period last year, a
decrease of $12,532.47. This decrease causes us great anxiety.

       *       *       *       *       *


SCHOOL ANNIVERSARIES SOUTH.

The establishment of schools for Freedmen and the encouragement
given for institutions for whites in the South since the war,
has introduced into that portion of the country a new era. It
has given a brighter horizon to the blacks and elevated the
aspirations of the whites. In many localities it has afforded an
entirely new industry, and given pleasures and pastimes foreign to
all the former experiences of the lowly laboring people of that
locality. This is especially seen in the anniversaries of the
institutions founded through the benevolence of the North. These
hold their closing exercises at this season, and in many instances
make the country alive with enthusiasm for the progress of the
rising generation. There are several features of these occasions
that register the tide-mark of a growing civilization, and are,
therefore, fitted to encourage those who are watching the destinies
of the country and the success of Christ’s kingdom in the world.

It is a notable fact that philanthropic people from the North are
interested to make journeys South to attend these anniversaries.
Something of interest and profit is expected not only by those
immediately connected with the schools, but by the citizens of the
country where the school exists. Commencement Day is coming to be a
general holiday, a time when whole families come in for miles to be
present to witness the graduation of children or friends; to hear
the fine music, to listen to the addresses, and to observe whatever
of interest attaches to the occasion. These great assemblies are
inspiring, educative, reformatory. We give an account of nine
such in this number of the MISSIONARY, which we trust will be of
interest and profit to our readers.

       *       *       *       *       *


NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL ASSEMBLY.

The second annual session of the National Educational Assembly
will be held at Ocean Grove, New Jersey, Aug. 9, 10, 11, 12. The
purpose of the session is to bring together on the same platform
prominent representatives of popular education, irrespective of
section, church or political party; to awaken and direct public
sentiment in favor of enlarged national, state and church efforts
for the education and elevation of the illiterate masses of our
country. The chief subjects for discussion during the Assembly
will be National Aid to Common Schools, The Negro in America, the
Mormon Question, and the Indian Question. The following, with other
well-known persons, are announced to be present and address the
meetings: Gen. John Eaton, Frederick Douglas, Bishop Simpson, Rev.
A. D. Mayo, Senator Blair, of New Hampshire, Judge Tourgee, Hon. T.
W. Bicknell, Bishop Whipple, Secretaries Strieby, Morehouse, Rust
and Kendall. The Assembly will be conducted by Rev. J. C. Hartzell,
D.D., who can be addressed at Saratoga Springs, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONFERENCE OF MISSIONARIES

A conference of missionary teachers and preachers who have
heretofore labored, or are now laboring, in the Southern States
from the North, is called to meet at Ocean Grove, New Jersey, Aug.
11 and 12. This conference will form a part of the proceedings of
the National Education Assembly which will then be in session at
that time and place.

An address of welcome will be delivered by Rev. C. H. Fowler, D.D.,
LL.D., of New York City, and responsive addresses will be made by
representatives of the different denominations engaged in the work.

The Conference has the approval of the corresponding secretaries of
the American Missionary Association, the Freedmen Aid Society of
the Methodist Episcopal church, the Board of Missions for Freedmen
of the Presbyterian church, and the Home Missionary Society of
the Baptist church. These secretaries will all be present and
participate in the conference.

A committee of entertainment will be on the ground to receive those
who attend, and arrangements will be made for their entertainment
at hotels and private houses at reasonable rates.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MENDI MISSION.

It will be remembered that in compliance with the instructions
given at our last annual meeting, arrangements were made with the
United Brethren in Christ to conduct the Mendi Mission for a term
of years. Dr. Flickinger, the Secretary, visited Africa to mature
plans for carrying on the mission in connection with the one
maintained in the immediate vicinity (the Shengay) by his society.
He has just returned and made report, from which we take the
following extract:

“We opened a new station at Manboh, a town about midway from Avery
to Shengay, immediately on the coast, which is quite a suitable
place for a mission. This is in charge of Rev. Mr. Fowler, who
commenced work at that point the middle of March, and when last
heard from was doing well. We now have ten native missionaries
employed, who are giving their entire time to teaching and
preaching, and with the help afforded by Rev. Mr. Gomer and Mr.
Wilberforce, are to preach in 113 towns as often as once in two
weeks, and in some every week. With the four stations and 31
preaching places on the Mendi side and eight on the Sherbro side,
we now have 12 stations and as many day and Sunday-schools, with
144 towns or preaching places to be provided for in connection with
these missions. The Boomphe Mission, which has four stations and 40
towns lying to the northeast from Sherbro Mission, as Mendi lies to
the southeast, the three extending over 100 miles along the coast
and embracing 184 towns, are giving from twelve to fifteen thousand
people the opportunity of hearing the Gospel and several hundred
children the privilege of attending both day and Sabbath-school.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE JOHN BROWN STEAMER.

Rev. Dr. Flickinger was also empowered to contract for the John
Brown steamer, and visited England last December, on his way
to Africa, spending some days in conference with ship builders
relating to the kind and size of vessel needful. Before closing
the contract, however, he decided to examine the depth and width
of the rivers upon which it was to be used and other matters
involved in its success in connection with the Mendi Mission. Upon
his return to England in May, he contracted with Mr. Edward Hayes,
of Stratford, for the construction of the steamer. It is to be 60
feet long, 12 feet beam and 7 feet deep amid ships, draft of water
3½ feet, speed from 7 to 8 miles per hour to carry 15 tons cargo
besides coal for running two days, and to have cabin accommodations
for seven persons and room for the crew in the forecastle. It is
to be of the best of iron and material throughout. Its engine will
be 36 horse-power and of the most substantial kind, and the boiler
of ample size and strength, adapted for wood or coal. It is to be
finished in the early autumn and to cost £1,777. To this must be
added about £300 for transporting and putting it in order for use,
or a little above $10,000 in all. We trust that unpaid pledges to
this Association for the steamer will be forwarded to us without
delay.

       *       *       *       *       *

We call attention to the communication in this number from Rev.
W. C. Pond, Superintendent of our Chinese missions. The magnitude
and importance of his work will, we hope, stir the hearts of our
friends to liberal contributions in its behalf.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—A plan to expend $10,000,000 in the purchase of land to form two
hundred new villages in Algeria will be presented to the French
Chamber at the beginning of the session.

—Ahmed Tewfik Effendi, a Turk of high rank, has made a profession
of Christianity and has gone to Cairo to work among the
Mohammedans, under the direction of Mr. Klein.

—The Khedive has given a portion of land at Cairo to Miss Whately
that she may erect a building for her school. The school contains
200 girls and 300 boys, of which two-thirds of the girls and
one-half of the boys are Mohammedans.

—The London _Daily News_ announces that the Egyptian government has
decided to send an engineer to Soudan to form a plan for a railroad
between Khartoum and Souakim.

—The Magwangwaras have released without ransom twenty-three
Christian prisoners that they had taken at Masasi. The amount that
had been destined to liberate these has been used to redeem the
Makouas and the Yaos, their neighbors, who had been reduced to
captivity with them. The farmers of Masasi, who have been sent to
Zanzibar, will return to their station when it is deemed expedient.

—Mr. O’Neill will undertake a journey of exploration in the region
between Mozambique and Nyassa. His principal object will be the
study of the western and northern shores of the lake Chirona, and
the ascension of a mountain near by, that is said to be covered
with snow. The Geographical Society of London has given two hundred
pounds for the enterprise.

—The English government has accepted an offer made by several
chiefs to cede to it a strip of territory between Liberia and
Sherbro 30 kilometres in length and two in width. The English rule
will then extend in an unbroken line from Sierra Leone to the
northern frontiers of Liberia.

—The chiefs along the river Magbeli have formed a union and
concluded a treaty of peace, which has opened the river to
commerce, and by this means a large quantity of products from the
interior will be brought to the coast.

—The number of slaves liberated by the fact of their arrival on
French territory increases rapidly at St. Louis. There are among
them many small children that must be left with their mothers, but
those who have attained an age when they can make themselves useful
are placed in the families of the settlers.

—Captain Hore and his companions have successfully accomplished the
arduous undertaking of conveying to Ujiji in sections the steel
life-boat, which was dispatched from England in July last. The
caravan reached its destination on the 23d of February.

—The reports this year from the Niger Mission sent in by the two
African Archdeacons, Henry Johnson and Dandeson Crowther, are among
the most remarkable of recent date. There are now 4,000 souls under
regular Christian instruction at Bonny and Brass. On one occasion
Mr. Johnson was invited to tell the story of the Gospel in a
heathen town, where he found 500 people waiting to hear him.


THE CHINESE.

—Seven Chinamen were admitted as members of the Presbyterian Church
at Los Angeles at the communion in April.

—The Hawaiian law prohibiting Chinamen from coming to the Islands
has been repealed, and over 3,000 Chinese laborers have contracted
for their passage there.

—“The Chinese American” is the name of a paper recently started in
New York under the editorial management of Wong Chin Foo.

—It is reported that there are 2,500 Chinese in New York and its
suburbs. Of these 600 are under instruction in Sunday-school, one
school having 112 scholars in attendance at one time. Much labor
is involved in their instruction, as a teacher is given to each
scholar. About 40 are professing Christians. Three or four are
studying for the ministry, and one has gone back to China as a
missionary.

—There are 60 Chinamen in Springfield, Ohio, 30 of whom are members
of the Sabbath-school. They claim that they cannot all attend at
the same time, because the “Christians,” as they call all white
people, will take advantage of their absence and break into their
laundries and steal their money.

—Rev. C. R. Hager and Lee Sam, sent by the American Board to
establish a mission in those districts of South China from which
the Chinese in America have come, are already at work. A house
has been rented and an evening school for the instruction of the
Chinese in English provided for. The plan for instilling the truths
of the Gospel into the minds of the scholars by using the Bible
to some extent for a textbook, which has been so successful in
California, will be adopted.


THE INDIANS.

—At the annual examination of the Carlisle Indian Training School,
Secretary Teller, Commissioner Price and Albert K. Smiley of
the Board of Indian Commissioners, were present. The school now
contains 367 pupils, 240 boys and 127 girls.

[Illustration: INDIAN ENCAMPMENT.]

—The ambition of the Alaska Indian boys is seen in the response
made by one Rudolph who was urged to marry a chief’s widow, “I
would never marry dirty old Indian; for $1,000 I never marry her.
When I am a man, I want to take a good, clean girl for wife. I want
her to know books and to housekeep like Boston girl. I not like it
my house all dirty, my children not washed.”

—According to the latest statistical report of the Missionary
Society of the Cumberland Presbyterian Church, it had among the
Indians thirteen ordained and licensed preachers, seven candidates,
forty ruling elders, twenty-nine deacons, twenty-four organized
congregations, and five hundred and twenty-seven communicants.

—Bishop Whipple, on a recent visit to the Indians of his diocese,
administered the communion to 247 Chippewas. Fifteen years ago
there was scarcely one communicant among them; now there are 8
churches in that mission, and they are building one to cost $10,000.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

S. E. Lee, Esq., of Richmond, Va., has recently given $5,000 to
Wake Forest College.

The Earl of Zetland has given $25,000 to the Edinburgh Association
for the university education of women.

Mrs. Senator Grimes, of Burlington, has given $1,000 for Blair
Hall, Iowa College.

Smith College, Northampton, Mass., is to receive $500 worth of new
and valuable books, the amount having been secured through the
influence of Miss Sanborn.

Mr. Moody’s Mt. Hermon school for boys has received a gift of
$5,000 from England.

Union Theological Seminary, N.Y., has received $40,000 from a
friend who does not give the public his name, for instituting a
professorship for elocution and boys’ culture.

By the will of Robert Asa Packer, Lehigh University is to receive
one half of his personal and real estate, which is believed to
amount to several million dollars.

A gift of $7,500 has been made to Rutgers College by Henry W.
Bookstaver, Esq., of New York City, a member of the Board of
Trustees, for purchasing chemical instruments and other apparatus
for the class room.

By the will of Miss Mary Anne McSorley, St. John’s College,
Brooklyn, is to receive $2,000 for two scholarships for theological
students, and St. Joseph’s school for girls $500.

Princeton College has received $60,000 from the estate of the late
Frederick Marquand of New York.

_The eight chartered institutions of the A. M. A. hold their
anniversaries at this season. Each of them has good grounds,
suitable buildings and a competent faculty. They are located at
central points where they will be wanted for generations. Each one
needs, and is worthy of, an ample endowment._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT.

PROF. ALBERT SALISBURY, SUPERINTENDENT OF EDUCATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARY REPORTS.


HAMPTON INSTITUTE.

BY MISS HELEN W. LUDLOW.

The fourteenth anniversary of Hampton Institute was observed on
May 24. The morning was devoted as usual to examinations and
recitations, with exhibitions of the products of the various
industrial departments and their operation. The Senior class was
examined in political economy and civil government, literature,
ancient history, arithmetic and algebra. They did very creditably,
stimulated by the occasion, as is usual, to do their best. They had
undergone less brilliantly, but on the whole fairly well, a severer
test during three days previous, of written and oral examinations,
conducted by or before an invited examining committee, consisting
of Prof. Samuel Elliot, LL.D., late Superintendent of schools in
Boston, and Prof. Albert Salisbury, Superintendent of Education for
the American Missionary Association Schools. The general average of
the class on the subjects marked by Prof. Salisbury (arithmetic and
political economy) was 70 and a fraction, several standing from 90
to 93. Dr. Eliot’s eyes not allowing him to inspect papers closely,
the others were marked by Mrs. E. N. L. Walton of Boston, who came
down to conduct for the third time the annual Normal Institute at
Hampton for its Senior class and graduates.

The under classes had their customary reviews. The Indian classes
were special attractions, as usual, particularly the division of
latest comers, in which some tiny girls and solemn braves emulated
each other in telling, in unexceptionable English, what went
into and out of a remarkably omnivorous bag, and what evolutions
were performed by its various contents; their teacher winning
Dr. Eliot’s enthusiastic declaration that “her praises ought to
be sounded from the gutter to the university.” The Indians also
did well in geography, history, arithmetic and an elementary
botany class. The little kitchen-gardeners from the Butler School
were as captivating as usual in their white pinafores and red
turbans and housekeeping accomplishments. The center of the
industrial exhibition was the Stone Memorial building; handsome
wood work, turned moldings, flooring, doors, sashes, etc., from
the “Huntington Industrial Works;” shoes ready for filling the
contract for agency supplies; shining tinware from the “Indian
Training Shop,” sets of harness from the same; desks, settees,
tables and cupboards made for the school, and a neatly painted
sign—all the work of Indian and colored apprentices, whose names,
with the period of their training, from five months to three years,
were indicated on cards affixed to their respective productions.
The wheelwright and blacksmith shops showed similarly ax-helves,
wheels and iron work, and outside the door two gaily painted farm
carts proclaimed the skill of Indian and Negro mechanics. The
tailoring department showed suits of clothes made by colored and
Indian hands. The girls of both races were represented by very neat
sewing and inviting-looking cake. The farm products had a table to
themselves; early vegetables, grains and grasses. An interesting
exhibit was that of the little carpenters from the Butler School,
a couple of miniature frame houses, clap-boarded and painted, with
sets of tables, desks and chairs for furnishing.

The Normal School Press office had its own exhibit of printing and
book binding. The press was running, the student compositors, boys
and girls at their cases, and the veteran United States soldier at
his book-binder’s table.

The various shops were all in operation through part of the
morning, and many visitors walked through them to see the
Afric-American, native African and Indian apprentices working side
by side at their various trades in the commodious quarters in which
most are at last accommodated. Some extended their walk to the barn
to visit the stock.

The afternoon exercises in Whitin Chapel and Virginia Hall
consisted, as usual, of essays by the graduating class and former
graduates, with music by the school choir, a recitation of one of
Whittier’s poems by a modest ladylike Indian girl of the Junior
class, and a talk in the Sioux language by one of the three young
Indian fathers now in training with their families at Hampton. His
wife and baby boy stood admiring listeners in the doorway, ready
to vanish when the applause of the latter became too vociferous.
The Indian said impressively (interpreted by a school mate), “You
all know that when a man walks in darkness, if he sees a light
somewhere he will go to it; so I want you all to have compassion on
us and teach us more of your knowledge. I am always thinking about
the good news. I came myself to learn how to tell the good news to
my people and show them the right way. We know that you have helped
us, but we need more help. If anybody told you to do something you
never had done before, could you do it at once? They will have
to tell you three or four times before you know how to do it. My
friends, that is just the way with the Indians.”

Diplomas were presented to the twenty-eight members of the
graduating class. Interesting speeches followed by several of the
invited guests. Prof. Newell, Superintendent of the Maryland State
Normal school in Baltimore, Dr. Eliot, Rev. Dr. Furber of Newton,
Mass., Rev. Dr. Mix of Fall River, Rev. Dr. Burrows and Rev. Mr.
Spiller of Norfolk, the last, a colored minister, all made very
enthusiastic and telling impromptu addresses under the inspiration
of the occasion.

The average attendance of pupils for the year just past, has
been 510, of which 110 have been Indians. The work done compares
favorably with that of former years. The annual reports of the
Principal, teachers and heads of industrial departments, published
in the June number of the _Southern Workman_, and still more
fully in pamphlet form, with the treasurer’s report, give many
interesting details of Hampton’s work and prospects.


FISK UNIVERSITY, NASHVILLE.

MISS ANNA M. CAHILL.

On Sunday, May 20, the baccalaureate sermon was preached in the
chapel of Livingstone Missionary Hall. This and all the other
exercises of Commencement had the added interest of being the first
held in our new building—a building in whose beauty and usefulness
for school purposes we have rejoiced all the year.

Ten young people—three graduating from the higher normal course
and seven from the college course—listened to the earnest words of
President Cravath, spoken especially to them, from John 14:23, on
the power and need of an inner life of communion with God.

The annual missionary meeting which is always held by the
missionary society on the evening of Commencement Sunday, was
duly observed. Tidings had reached us of the illness of Secretary
Woodworth, who was to have given the missionary address, and,
failing to supply his place, we were thrown back upon our own
existing missionary zeal, which, we were glad to find, burned
brightly enough upon the home hearth to make a solemn, impressive
hour of this last Sunday service.

Our Commencement week happened to coincide with “military week”
in Nashville, for which great preparation had been made, and the
city was gaily decorated with the national colors, and crowded
with people. We had feared the effect of the excitement on the
school, but found no cause for anxiety. Our pupils were too much
absorbed in their work to be drawn away by the attractions of the
parade ground, and our audiences seemed not to be much increased or
diminished by the event. The class admitted to college on Monday
evening numbers eight, three of whom are children of professors in
the university. Among the essays and orations of the evening, were
pleas to imaginary millionaires in the audience for a gymnasium,
a conservatory of music and other improvements. Thus the incoming
classes are seeing needs and making demands which the university
has no means of meeting.

On Tuesday there drove up to the door of Livingstone Hall a
furniture wagon, from which was unloaded a suspicious-looking
rectangular box addressed to Prof. A. K. Spence. Strange that
through the law of association so much of harmony can be suggested
by so simple a geometrical form. Curious eyes watched the opening,
and saw with delight on lifting the top a handsome Steinway square
grand piano. It was carried into the chapel and placed upon the
platform. Rumor said it was a gift, but nothing further could be
learned until Commencement day.

In the midst of the exercises of the higher normal graduation on
Wednesday evening, Secretary Woodworth entered and took a retired
seat on the platform. His health was so far restored as to enable
him to travel, though not in time to reach us before Sunday. The
alumni address, which formed part of the programme of the evening,
was given by Prof. McPherron. After this Secretary Woodworth was
called out from his retirement and spoke for a few minutes. The
list of alumni was read, the present work of each stated and the
announcement made that steps had already been taken by the alumni
to raise gradually a sufficient sum to endow a professorship in the
university.

The last great day, Thursday, was as perfect as clear skies and
fresh, dustless air could make it. A large audience of both white
and colored people assembled early. The young men marched to
Jubilee Hall, and a procession was there formed to return to the
chapel. The British flag was draped over the platform on this
birthday of England’s queen, and the room was bright with terraces
of flowering plants. The seven young people who appeared as
candidates for a degree represent many years of work on the part
of student and teacher; the average length of time spent in the
institution by members of the class is seven years. The one young
lady took for her theme, the great field of work opening before
and among the girls of the South and the necessary training for
that work. Spoken from her standpoint her words were full of solemn
meaning. After the graduates had finished their part, we listened
eagerly to the address of Dr. Washington Gladden on the causes of
poverty, ignorance and vice—the threefold evil against which we are
fighting.

When the final piece of music had been sung, Prof. Spence asked
permission to say a few words, and after some rapid wheeling
of pianos to certain places on the platform, announced that
Mrs. General Fisk had presented the new piano for the chapel of
Livingstone Hall. Its companion was given by the same lady some
years ago for the parlors of Jubilee Hall. Mention was made of the
many other gifts of Mrs. Fisk, and a vote of gratitude for her
kindness was heartily given by the entire audience. To afford an
opportunity to hear both pianos together, Mendelssohn’s wedding
march was played as a quartet.

A prominent Southern gentleman of Nashville, himself a former
slaveholder, was present for the first time with other invited
guests at the alumni dinner, and spoke warmly, cordially and
strongly for our work. The most encouraging comment that I have
heard on the exercises of the week was made by a former student,
who was present: “It seems to me that every Commencement is better
than the last.” So may it continue to be while Fisk University
stands.


TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

BY REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D.

Talladega, in Eastern Central Alabama, is a bright village of a
thousand people, lying high up among the hills, away from the
malaria which lurks in the valleys below. The air is soft and
bracing, the water pure and sweet, and the whole region eminently
beautiful. Here Talladega College was founded in 1867. The college
is beautiful for situation, and in this respect would contest
the palm with any institution we have, except possibly, Fisk
at Nashville. Encircled on all sides by green mountain ranges,
lying far up among the hills, it is one of the most inviting and
salubrious spots in the State, and must have been foreordained as
the site of a college.

The institution is well equipped for work. Stone Hall, Swayne
Hall, Graves Hall, and Foster Hall are solid and comely, and have
accommodated more than 298 students the present year. And of the
campus, on which Swayne Hall sits, shaded with superb water oaks,
it must be said we know of nothing finer in the South. Connected
with the college is a farm of some 200 acres, mostly cultivated
by the young men. Here they learn the art, as well as the science
of farming, and here the supplies for the students’ table are
principally raised.

It may be doubted whether any school of the A. M. A. is occupying
a more needy field, or has around it a larger constituency.
Alabama has a colored population of some 630,000, for whom
Talladega College is the only institution in the State offering
to them the advantages of the higher education. For the supply of
trained teachers, of educated ministers, and of intelligent and
reliable leaders—for this immense multitude Talladega must be the
main reliance. The college, therefore, has a mission at its own
doors, and for the present has more than it can do to meet the
home demand. Its students are scattered throughout the State, as
teachers and preachers, and their influence is felt in every public
interest.

The Faculty of the college is able, clear-headed and intensely
in earnest. President De Forest is an enthusiast in his work.
Scholarly, inspiring, magnetic and full of faith in the capacity of
the negro for the finest culture, and to reach the highest manhood,
he does not mind the isolation of his position, nor the ostracism
attending it, but finds perpetual joy in seeing the good work
prosper in his hands.

It was my good fortune to be present during parts of three days in
Commencement week, though not permitted to witness the exercises
on Commencement day. Of the general air of the school there can
be only words of praise. The quiet of the students on the campus,
on the streets, in the class rooms, the self-respect in their
bearing everywhere manifest, was a token both of the discipline
of the school and of the spirit of the scholars. We heard
creditable examinations in grammar, in Virgil, in the evidences
of Christianity and in the life of Christ. But the exercise which
interested us most was the reading of six or seven essays by
members of the theological class. These papers, we were assured,
had received scarcely any alteration in passing through the hands
of the professor. They were clear, sharp, radical in thinking and
independent in style and expression. Two college presidents were
brought to the bar of criticism, and it really looked as if the
students had the best of the argument. Yet there was no appearance
of arrogance or of self-conceit; only the air of honest, thoughtful
men.

The class of students as a whole seemed made up of earnest,
aspiring youth, eager for an education and willing to make every
possible sacrifice in order to secure it. As an instance, I saw
a man in the grammar school, somewhere from thirty-five to forty
years of age, who will work in the foundry six months or a year,
and then will take his earnings and go to school as long as they
will last. This he has been repeating for years. Another was
pointed out to me who had worked on the farm a whole year, and then
was using up his credits in schooling and board.

I should not give a complete idea of the college unless I spoke
particularly of its religious tone. This is of the highest, and was
especially satisfactory. President De Forest is a man of profound
religious convictions, and has not the slightest faith in education
which does not include the moral as well as the intellectual
character. Hence the Bible is put underneath all the courses of
instruction, and religion made the practical and ever-present duty
of the daily life.

Talladega, like so many other institutions, needs endowments for
its various chairs of instruction. For lack of these it is sadly
limited in the good it might accomplish, and its Faculty are badly
handicapped and bearing burdens which are making them old before
their time. Let me whisper into the ear of men who are asking what
they shall do with the wealth committed to their care: Here is an
object worthy of their largest charity, and, at the same time,
an object most needy and most appealing. Let them give to this
thousands and tens of thousands, and they will make no mistake.


STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS.

REV. W. S. ALEXANDER, D.D.

It would, we believe, be the judgment of the Faculty and the
public, that the past year has been one of exceptional prosperity.
Our catalogue shows a roll of 380 names with an average attendance
larger than any previous year. The examinations in the Law
Department came first in order. The ordeal was severe, certainly
a fair test of legal reading, and fidelity to lectures. Ten young
men, eight white and two colored, met this ordeal with great credit
to themselves and their instructors, and received their degree of
Bachelor of Law. They have since been admitted by the Supreme Court
to practice in all the courts of the State. It should be mentioned
as a sign of growth in public sentiment, that one of the Professors
in the Law Department, a native Charlestonian, has lately published
a Book on Admiralty Law, and on the title page appended to his name
the following: “Professor of Commercial Law, Equity, and Admiralty
in Straight University.” The Sumner Literary Society was addressed
by Gen. R. B. Elliot, formerly in Congress from South Carolina.
He is one of the most eloquent representatives of the colored
race. His treatment of the theme “The Advance of Civilization in
the United States,” was able, eloquent, and scholarly. It was a
rare pleasure to listen to him. He was a friend of Charles Sumner,
and the dead statesman had no more eloquent eulogist than he.
Our Alumni Association was addressed by Rev. A. E. P. Albert, of
the class of ’81. His oration was a careful defense of the negro
against the rude and savage assaults recently made upon him. A poem
was delivered by Mr. Colwell, of Baton Rouge, of the class of ’79.
It possessed real poetic merit, and was gracefully delivered. He
was cheered to the echo. It was interesting to observe the hearty
enthusiasm of the audience over “the coming poet.” The Annual
Exhibition at the University Chapel, under the direction of our
most faithful and efficient Dean, was a great success. The Chapel
was crowded to excess, and a happier audience is seldom gathered.

Our Commencement on Tuesday evening in Central Church was an
indication both of the excellence and efficiency of the instruction
afforded by the University, and the strong hold which the school
has gained in the public regard and appreciation. The large
auditorium was crowded. A fair estimate of the audience would
place it at 800, and they remained with delighted attention from
8 o’clock to 11 o’clock. Four young men and one young woman
graduated from the Classical Department, and two young men from the
Higher English Department. Their orations were well and carefully
written, showing mature thought and manly convictions. It was
certainly suggestive of the possibilities of the race to see the
manly bearing of these young people, and to hear them treat with
real ability and eloquence such themes as “The first Century of
the Republic,” “The Survival of the Fittest,” “Pride of Race” and
“Head Workers and Hand Workers.” To those who have a chronic habit
of detracting from the abilities of the negro we say, “_beat them
if you can_.” It was a delightful feature of Commencement that the
son of our beloved dean took his diploma in the Higher English
Department, and delivered an oration on “The Future Fields of
Conquest in Science,” which did credit to his heart and his head.
We departed from our usual custom in conferring upon two of our
graduates the degree of Bachelor of Science. It was the judgment of
the Faculty and our Board of Trustees that this should be done. The
young men have devoted several years to classical and scientific
study in the University; their scholarship has averaged 9¼ on a
scale of 10, and they have pursued such special studies as the
Faculty have assigned them. At the close of the regular examination
a special examination was appointed for them before a committee
of the Board of Trustees, in whose presence they also read a
scientific thesis, the one on “Applied Electricity” and the other
on “The Copernican System.” Thus closes another school year, and we
are able to say as never before: “Hope is in the ascendant” for our
beloved University. Service this year has been a joy, and Almighty
God has crowned that service with his blessing. To Him be all the
glory.


TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

The assembling of the Sunday-school and the study of the lesson
entitled Paul and Barnabas in Cyprus, with “Separate me Barnabas
and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them,” as its
key-note, seemed a most fitting introduction to the Commencement
exercises upon the close of which a large number of the students
were to go forth to their summer’s work.

Following the Sunday-school exercises, and in keeping with
the custom of previous anniversaries of this institution, a
Sabbath-school convention was held, in which was discussed a
variety of topics calculated to stimulate and aid the students in
their Sunday-school work. These exercises were enjoyed by a large
number of people, many of whom were from a distance.

At 7:30 P.M. the chapel was again filled. The well-drilled choir
sang “I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills” in a way to inspire
all present. The sermon to the graduating class was upon the words,
“Return to thine own house and show how great things God hath done
unto thee.”

Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday were occupied with the oral
examinations of the different departments. These examinations
were well sustained by the students, who gave good evidence that
their instructors had been faithful and thorough in their work.
The attendance of visitors upon the examinations was good, but
as the last day drew near, large numbers arrived by every train.
Many came by their own conveyances. One persistent young man, a
former student, eager to attend the Commencement, came a distance
of thirty miles _on foot_. On Wednesday evening the audience room
was filled with an expectant throng. The exhibition which called
it together was greatly enjoyed, and reflected much credit upon
those charged with the laborious task of planning and training and
bringing it to pass.

When Thursday morning dawned, many more were added to the number
of visitors already present. The audience assembled promptly at
11 o’clock. Members of the State Board of Visitors, with other
distinguished guests, were upon the platform. The music by the
choir elicited much praise. Three young men and two young women
having completed the Elementary Normal Course were graduated,
receiving certificates of fitness to teach the common English
branches. Five others were appointed to supplement the programme of
literary exercises.

The essays and orations presented covered the following range of
topics: “The Teachers;” “Genius and Success;” “Whitewash;” “Why
a Young Man Should Seek a Thorough Education;” “The Material
Advancement of the South;” “The Cause of Temperance;” “As You
Would Have It;” “The Study of Physical Science;” “The American
Missionary Association;” “Home.” The Principal of the Normal
Department then presented certificates to the graduating class,
setting forth in a few well chosen and emphatic words the nature of
these certificates, of the step the graduates had taken, and that
there was more beyond. Col. J. L. Power, editor of the _Clarion_,
a man of wide influence in the State and a staunch friend of the
school, spoke on behalf of the State Board of Visitors, of which
he is the Secretary. He paid a glowing tribute to the work of the
school and of the American Missionary Association. In referring
to the essay on “Whitewash,” he said there was no _whitewashing_
done at Tougaloo—that it was the _genuine_ stuff. Referring to
the oration on the American Missionary Association, he said he
had known considerable about the Association and its work, but
that he was amazed at the magnitude of its work. In closing his
speech, which also was without “whitewash,” he said it would be
the pleasure of the Board of Visitors at the meeting of the next
Legislature to ask for at least as large an appropriation as the
institution had received for the last two years. Rev. Dr. C. B.
Galloway, Editor of the _Southern Christian Advocate_, was then
introduced. He commended the work of the institution and expressed
his satisfaction with the original, direct, practical, common-sense
way in which the essays and orations had been written and
presented. He was impressed with the absence of grandiloquent gush,
so characteristic of the youthful mind on Commencement platforms.

After the Commencement dinner the graduating class held their “Ivy
Exercise,” which consisted of a class song, class poem, planting
the ivy and an address by a member of the Faculty.

In the evening R. W. Jackson, class of ’80, delivered the address
before the Alumni, on “Decision.” It was well written and full of
interest. At its close Mr. G. W. Jackson of Whiteside, Tenn., a
former student, and Miss Rosa McCutcheon of Chattanooga, Tenn.,
class of ’82, stepped upon the _Commencement_ platform and were
united in Christian marriage, constituting by this sacred tie a
_Christian family_. Thus closed a most successful year of faithful
work.


THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

REV. J. G. CRAIGHEAD, D.D.

The anniversary exercises were held in the Fourth Presbyterian
Church, Washington City, May 4, when six young men who had
completed the regular three years’ course of study received the
usual certificate of the department. Five delivered addresses
before a large audience, and were subsequently complimented by many
of the most judicious friends of the race who were present, for
the discriminating and just treatment of their subjects, and for
their evident improvement of the advantages of instruction which
they had enjoyed. One of the graduates sails in June for Africa,
as a missionary of the Presbyterian Board; another is waiting an
opportunity to labor on the same continent; the remaining four go
to the wide and needy field in the South—each in a different State,
so great is the demand for capable laborers.

The past year has been one of marked favor and prosperity to the
department. Thirty-four students have been under instruction, and
there has been no interruption in study, by reason of sickness,
either on the part of professors or students. The location of the
institution on the high ground north of the city, overlooking both
it and the Potomac River, is most conducive to health, while it
secures the quiet essential to educational work. With a complete
and regularly systematized course of studies extending over three
years; with six Professors (thanks to the wise liberality of the
American Missionary Association) imparting instruction in all the
branches of study pursued in like theological seminaries in this
country, pious young men can here be prepared to become effective
workmen for Christ, either at home or abroad. As these advantages
become better known to those wishing to study for the ministry, we
may expect that an increased number will seek to profit by them.

And this is desirable for many reasons. With our present
facilities we could equally well instruct twice or thrice the
present number did the men present themselves having the proper
preliminary education for the study of theology. Our greatest need
is _scholarships_, both to secure this elementary training and
to assist students while in the theological department. Without
some aid, but few can obtain a proper education for usefulness in
the university. Not much is required, as compared with what white
students require and receive, but this little is necessary to
stimulate personal effort, and to help them over insurmountable
obstacles on the road to useful knowledge. Is there a cheaper
or better way for patriots or Christians to solve this social,
political, moral and religious problem?


WILMINGTON, N.C.

BY MR. W. H. THRALL.

Perhaps the tendency of this people is to give much prominence
to showy performances. We have aimed this year in Wilmington to
check this, and not to allow preparations for the “exhibition” to
interrupt regular recitation-room work.

The scholars were early given to understand that the last monthly
examinations would be more than usually difficult; that they would
be oral as well as written, and that very much would depend upon
the results. The last four days of the school year were given up to
the examinations. If the readers of THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY could
have hurried through the deep sands of Wilmington’s streets, to our
school building on one of those days, they would have seen four
rooms crowded with anxious workers, telling with tongue or pen,
what they had been learning during the months past.

Some of the pupils, after writing steadily for two or three hours
at a time begged the privilege of continuing their work at the
noon recess and after school hours. The papers spoke for the
thoroughness of the work that they had done.

Upon the walls were hung map drawings, specimens of penmanship and
of freehand drawing, that would compare well with exhibits which
I have seen in rooms of the same grades in the best schools in
the North. In the First Primary Room were two things of especial
interest: a table covered with needle-work made by the smallest
girls of the school, and two sets of papers placed side by side,
showing the penmanship, spelling, figures, etc., of the same pupil
in October, 1882, and in May, 1883. The work of the pupils of that
room at the number-table, and their writing and reading, encourage
us that there is reason for hope in the coming generation of
colored people.

The closing exercises of the school were held Tuesday evening,
May 29th. The hall, the aisles, entries, doors and windows were
crowded. The men even climbed the verandas to reach us. The pupils
had flooded us with the choicest flowers, grasses and foliage,
and the hall was beautifully decorated. The part the pupils had
in adorning it spoke well for their taste. At the appointed time
the audience of between four and five hundred was called to order,
and the programme commenced. For two hours and a half the throng
sat or stood, listening to recitations, declamations, dialogues,
essays, one oration, songs, etc. I wish the people of the North
who question the promise of this race could have been present.
There was hardly one hesitation in the recitations; the essays and
oration showed thought and good English; and little boys and girls
gave concert recitations in perfect unison.

Important features of the programme were, a tableau called “The
tempted boy and the guardian angel,” designed to give an object
lesson on temperance, and an illustrated poem by pupils of the
Grammar and Normal Room. Both of these exercises proved the pupils’
readiness to understand and their quickness to execute. The teacher
in charge had but little time to teach them, yet everything was
done with ease and rapidity.

The evening’s entertainment was a fresh exhibit to us all of the
talent and the tact that lie dormant in this race, which is to
be the ruling race in twelve States at no distant day; and we
bade “good-bye” to our pupils with new courage to go on with a
work which must be slow, but is essential to the very life of our
country.


EMERSON INSTITUTE, MOBILE, ALA.

BY MISS HELEN D. BARTON.

Anniversary exercises at Emerson Institute, May 25th. The
much-talked-of and long-looked-for last day of school had come.
Though it was the last day many of the last things had already
been done. The last hour of hard study was over, the last
recitation heard, the last examination paper marked. The two days
preceding had been devoted to what were, by courtesy, called oral
examinations. In reality, however, much of the time, in the lower
rooms at least, was devoted to the entertainment of the visitors.
The favorite songs were sung and the best recitations made. If
George Washington’s mother or sister came in, George’s classes
were called, his slate work was examined and compared with others,
and he was invited to recite his “speech.” A variation from the
programme was made again and again that as far as possible the
visitors might judge of the work of the children in whom they are
more especially interested. This could be done as the certificates
for promotion were given on the standing of the pupils in the
written examinations held the second week in May.

Friday morning the children came together as a school for the last
time. After devotional exercises the departments were dismissed
to their own rooms, where the teacher read the per cents. of the
examinations and presented each pupil with a certificate grading
him for the coming year. Many faces brightened with pleasure.
Some few showed dissatisfaction; having fallen slightly below the
desired average they find the obnoxious word conditionally written
on the card. Others still feel bitter disappointment; having
failed, they must remain in the same grade. Some of these deserve
our sympathy, the failure being caused by poverty or sickness;
others are only reaping the reward of carelessness and indolence.

When the distribution of certificates was completed, Miss Caughey,
the principal, went in turn to each department, and after adding
her word of encouragement to the disappointed ones and approbation
to the successful ones, invited the promoted class to seats in the
room the next grade above. This ceremony was impressive, and many
showed the conflicting emotions of joy and sadness, joy at the
honor conferred and a sadness at the thought of separation from
teacher and schoolmates which caused them to go reluctantly to the
places assigned.

At the appointed hour in the evening the assembly room was filled
to overflowing with the eager happy children and their friends.
After prayer by Rev. O. D. Crawford the exercises given by the
pupils were called in, according to the programme. Mr. Crawford and
General Slaughter, Post-Master of the city, made brief remarks.
Where each one endeavored to do his best, it is difficult to
mention those who excelled. “Mother Goose and her Friends” chiefly
served the spice for the entertainment. One of our white friends
found it difficult to believe that this ancient singer of nursery
rhymes was not a middle aged woman instead of the young girl she
really is. The “Friends” were received with enthusiasm also, even
down to the “brave boy” Johnnie Horner, the baby of our school. The
tableau of “Hiawatha” was thoroughly enjoyed. In “Songs of Seven,”
the recitations “Seven Times One,” by little Odelia Chavanah and
“Seven Times Seven” by Miss Sallie Washington, were received
with gratifying applause. The valedictory by Miss Belle Daniels
deserved and received high praise. To critical eyes, no doubt, many
defects were evident; but our audience seemed well pleased and
congratulations were freely given. I think most of those present
would agree with old Aunt Gracie in her remark, summing it all up:
“It was delightful to be looked at.”


LE MOYNE INSTITUTE, MEMPHIS.

[A large amount of space is given in the _Memphis Daily Appeal_,
the _Daily Memphis Avalanche_ and the _Public Ledger_ to reports
of the anniversary exercises of the Le Moyne Institute. These,
with accompanying editorial paragraphs, indicate the high esteem
in which Prof. Steele and his corps of workers are held and the
appreciation of his school. The anniversary was attended by two
thousand people. The enthusiasm is represented to have been
continuous from the beginning to the end of the exercises, and the
effort of Prof. Steele to raise money for the Institute from the
citizens of Memphis was endorsed by many present. We give below an
extract from the _Appeal_ which represents how our work is regarded
by the better class of Southern people.—ED.]

The feeling in this city in favor of universal education was never
stronger than it is now. This is plainly shown by the interest
everywhere manifested in the Le Moyne Institute or school for
negroes, which gave so enjoyable an entertainment at the Greenlaw
Opera-house Monday night. A number of prominent citizens who were
present expressed the greatest surprise and astonishment, and the
opinion was general that the inculcation of ideas such as those of
which the graduates seemed possessed was bound to do good to them,
and by reflection upon the balance of the community.

“Was the entertainment at the Opera-house just as you reported it?”
asked a gentleman of an _Appeal_ reporter yesterday.

“Justice was not fully done,” was the reply.

“And the Le Moyne is a colored institution?”

“Yes.”

“You surprise me,” the gentlemen replied. “I have heard the Le
Moyne frequently spoken of, but had no idea it was accomplishing
all it is said to have done. Why, the subjects chosen by the
essayists could be handled only by those possessed of considerable
knowledge.”

“Yes, it is a new idea in the South,” remarked a listener, who had
been present at the entertainment, “and I find it difficult to say
whether I was most surprised or delighted. I heard every essay and
recitation from beginning to end, and there was not a break or
stumble, no stopping to recover breath, no tedious repetitions. The
absence of the parrot was noticeable. The novelty of the affair
held my attention at first, but I soon forgot this, and found
myself drifting along with the essayists as they waded into their
subjects. Another thing that struck me forcibly was the absence of
rant in the young men and the failure to giggle on the part of the
young women. They seemed to take it as a matter of course that they
were there, and that their audience would be interested in what
they might have to say. I, for one am heartily in favor of keeping
up the good work. No man who thinks can say that every negro in the
land would not be better off and better fitted to cope with the age
in which lives, if he had enough education to enable him to throw
off the dense cloud of superstition—a mixture of ignorance and
faith—in which he is now enveloped. The country would be better,
its tone purer and healthier, if every man in it were educated.”

“The music furnished by the graduates particularly attracted me,”
said a lady teacher who heard it. “I have always contended that
the negro had a passion for music of a certain rich and melodious
kind, but could not appreciate its delicate shading, and could
have no conception of it as a science. I am ready now to say
I was mistaken. Though the music the other night was nothing
extraordinary, I heard enough to convince me that its interpreters
had a good idea of symphony, and could with proper training, rise
to a high degree of excellence. The solo ‘I’ll Follow Thee’, was
one of the sweetest things I ever heard in public or private. The
voice of the young woman who sang it was pure and clear, every
cadence soft and melodious, every note in perfect tune. It was a
genuine revelation.”

“The whole entertainment was a revelation to me,” remarked an old
planter. “I attended the exhibition out of pure curiosity, never
dreaming that it would impress me as it has done. I have always
scouted the idea of negro education, and I may say I have been
its enemy. I am perfectly willing to give way now, however. But I
have one lingering fear—that it will take a wrong direction and
have a tendency to create an idle class and deplete the ranks of
labor, farm labor especially. If those who have the training of
the negro will keep this danger before them and guard against it,
then the result of their labor will be good; but if they fail and
allow their pupils to think labor is degrading; to think that man’s
only province is to cultivate his mind, then the result will be
deplorable. This I notice, however, has already been seen, and
I cannot say I have any fears on that score from the Le Moyne
Institute.”

Perhaps no subject has been more discussed than this since the
exhibition last Monday night.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


CATHOLIC MISSIONS.—RECENT CHANGES.

REV. MYRON EELLS, S’KOKOMISH, W.T.

About 30 years ago a Catholic priest came here, taught the people,
baptized some of them, made a few Indian priests, and left, so that
for many years previous to the assignment of the Agency to the
American Missionary Association they had received little religious
instruction. Intermarriage with some of the tribes where the
Catholics have had teachers has kept up remembrance of those early
times. One Indian especially, who has been among the very worst,
belongs to this class. Having failed to conquer the agent, he gave
up, but when he returned seemed determined if he failed in one way
to try another, and so began to revive the old Catholic religion,
and he has held such services frequently for a number of years.

About two years ago an Indian before his death saw several strange
visions, which combined some truth with much of the old Indian
superstition. This man leaned toward the Catholics, partly because
I did not believe these revelations to be of as much value as
the Bible, and partly because his relations favored the Catholic
religion. A few of them set up regular services, partly Catholic
and partly after their own revelations. At funerals they sometimes
wished me to officiate in company with them, but in most cases they
have given up and let me have the whole service.

Last fall another Indian who had moved away and taken a homestead
about 20 miles from here apparently died, but after six and a half
hours revived and told of wonderful things which he had seen. He
has since been baptized by the Catholics, built a church and become
a priest.

Last summer I spoke of two promising young men whom I hoped would
be of great Christian service here. The most promising after doing
very well for a time, brought great disgrace upon himself and was
suspended from the church. I have tried to show him his error, but
thus far it has not produced the result desired.

These Indians have almost entirely lost faith in their old religion
as such, but naturally want one of some kind. They are, however,
unwilling to give up their horse-racing and some of them their
gambling. I have been asked by several to baptize them, but refused
because of these things. The Catholic religion allows all this, and
so they have turned to it. The consolidation of the three Puget
Sound agencies into one last fall has given us thus far less moral
force here.

There have been occasional light spots. A letter came from Pearl
Street Church, in Hartford, where I taught a Sabbath-school
class fourteen years ago, offering us a barrel. It seemed very
providential, as if God were saying: “You work on, and I will take
care of the support.” The barrel came and everything appeared to
be so good that the children squealed, as they do not often, while
each article was taken out, and their mother often said: “How very
thoughtful the people were,” and we all had to thank God for it.

I have just returned from a visit to the Clallam Indians. I found
some of them doing well and some very badly, the agent having
during the past seven months had six times as many Indians to look
after as formerly, and the best subordinates which he has been able
to obtain have disappointed him. On the other hand, some have done
quite well, especially those who have procured land for homes. The
Christian Indians thus far stand well. They are not perfect, but
progressing. Two were received into the church during my visit,
and three others joined last November. The school-teacher, who
had resigned, left while I was there, and it is thought best to
give them a long vacation before sending them another. He had
charge of the Sabbath-school. The church expects to keep up its
regular services, including that of the Sabbath-school and a weekly
prayer-meeting. I have been fortunate in procuring some large,
cheap Bible pictures, which have taken the fancy of the Indians
very much. They have been in demand by all classes. I have already
obtained or ordered about 185 of them. I can impart religious truth
by them better than in any other way.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARIES—THE WORK DURING APRIL AND MAY.

REV. W. C. POND.

My report of progress in our Mission covers two months and even
more. It will be difficult to compress within my space all that I
would like to say.

Our mission at Santa Cruz celebrated its second anniversary
on Sunday evening, April 8. It was an occasion of great and
encouraging interest. Instead of the fifteen or twenty Chinese
present at the previous anniversary, we had at least fifty with
us. Instead of an assembly of Americans occupying in respectable
numbers the pews of the church, we had every inch of available
standing-room occupied, and I am told, at least two hundred went
away from the church door, unable to enter.

The fact that Chinese once settled in Santa Cruz, seem inclined to
stay there, and that consequently the membership of the school has
been less changeable than in some other places, gave us a better
opportunity than is sometimes afforded to measure the progress
during a year. The showing gave me great encouragement. There had
been marked progress in the use of the English language and in the
knowledge of the truth. Best of all, several who a year ago were
heathen, now seem to be true followers of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The contribution was the largest I ever received on any such
occasion, except in our own Bethany Church. It amounted in cash and
in pledges to over $100.

Our schools in San Francisco celebrated their eighth public
anniversary on April 29. This, too, was an exceedingly interesting
service, and our Bethany Church was filled. The point of special
interest and encouragement about it was this: That while the
exercises were in all respects equal to those of any previous
year, we were not obliged to call in the aid of any of our
helpers, except as they assisted in the service of song. The
original address in English by Lung Chung was a frank, manly and
effective statement of his own Christian life, with its faults and
shortcomings, as well as its new, strange light and peace.

I lay before the readers of the MISSIONARY the following paragraph,
which I placed in the _Pacific_ of May 9. I trust they will be
interested in the statement of facts, and am not without hope that
they will listen kindly to the appeal:

“The monthly reports for April show seventeen schools in active
operation and thirty-nine teachers and helpers employed. The total
number of pupils enrolled was 991; the average attendance, 415. The
attendance in this city is temporarily diminished on account of
the darkness of the streets; otherwise the enrollment would have
exceeded 1,000, and the average attendance would have approached
500. Of those now in attendance on the schools 172 profess to have
ceased from idolatry, and 116 are believed to be true Christians.
Two hundred and thirty-one new names were enrolled, and the
total number who have been connected with our schools during the
last eight months is no less than 2,356. With the beginning of
this month of May, another school is added to our list—the one
in Alameda. It has been sustained for several years with a most
Christ-like devotion by Mrs. E. L. Wilson. Unable to carry it on
any longer alone, she appeals to our mission for aid, and though
the operations already in hand task our resources to their utmost,
we could not let so good a work as Mrs. Wilson had been doing die
for the lack of a helping hand. It will be necessary to raise in
addition to the appropriation made by the American Missionary
Association, $5,500 to carry this work through to August 31, the
close of the present fiscal year. The utmost care is taken to make
each dollar do its best, but it is impossible to sustain so large
a work on less than $1,000 per month. A careful review of the
statistics given above will lead, I am sure, not to criticism of
the amount, but rather to surprise that at so little cost so much
has been accomplished. Of the $5,500 needed, I have on hand, or in
sight, $3,000, and for the balance I make an earnest appeal to our
churches, and to all friends of Christ and of humanity.”

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO THE LADIES OF THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES.

DEAR FRIENDS: Permit me to call your attention to the urgent needs
of the American Missionary Association in its department of Woman’s
Work.

Many earnest Christian women are personally engaged as missionaries
at the South, and among the Chinese and the Indians. They give
instruction in home duties, improved housekeeping, family
government, the best use of money; they gather children into
Sunday-schools, teach in day and boarding-schools—bearing with them
always the blessed Gospel truth, the foundation on which we build.

We need your aid in the support of these missionaries and
missionary teachers, who will thus become your representatives in
the field. Laboring with a lowly and despised people, they are cut
off in many instances from social privileges, and your Christian
love and remembrance will give strength and good cheer.

We need scholarships to aid worthy and needy students. Our
boarding-schools are doing a great work for _girls_, and often a
young girl is saved to a useful life by supplementing her meagre
funds and retaining her in school. We need supplies of clothing for
distribution by missionaries in getting the young into school and
Sabbath-school; also furnishing of bed and table linen for mission
homes and boarding halls. Already our matrons are asking supplies
of this kind.

We are indebted to the ladies of many of the Congregational
churches for valuable aid rendered, and now that the way is opened
for more direct communication with you, may we not hope that all
will become co-workers with our noble band of missionaries in
seeking to instruct and benefit the women of races so ignorant and
degraded as those with whom we labor?

We invite special correspondence in regard to the various fields
and the aid that can be given. Surely so important a work, not
limited to schools, but extending to the family and the church
relations, cannot be accomplished until _woman_ reaches forth her
hand to sister woman in uplifting helpfulness.

     Yours truly,
                                       D. E. EMERSON, Secretary.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSION HOMES.

MISS D. E. EMERSON.

“What is the Mission Home?” The question has often been asked by
friends contributing to our work, as well as by those about to
engage in it, and from the latter we have had some rather striking
descriptions of what they supposed the home to be, and of their
pleasant surprise upon reaching it. It is not a boarding hall for
students, as many have thought. Such halls are in connection with
boarding schools and accommodate both teachers and students.

The Mission Home, of which we give a specimen in the accompanying
cut, is at stations where we have churches and day schools, and is
the home of the pastor and teachers. In some of the larger cities,
as Wilmington, N.C., Savannah, Ga., Mobile, Ala., we have graded
schools requiring a teaching force of from six to ten persons. Then
there are the pastor and family and the lady missionary, and the
home accommodates all. As each has a special line of duty occupying
the full time, a matron is appointed to take charge of household
affairs and secure by her good management a pleasant and happy
home for the family. Sometimes the wife of the pastor or principal
acts as matron, sometimes the duties of matron and missionary are
combined. It is no insignificant position to have charge of such
a home, and our matrons are as truly missionaries as any in our
field; besides the direct opportunities of usefulness among the
people, they may add to the efficiency of every member of the
family by the cheerful, genial, restful spirit of the home, which
it is largely in their power to maintain.

This plan of Mission Homes has its advantages to the work. It gives
opportunity to teach by example varied lessons in home life, of
neatness, economy and thrift. The family altar is set up, and often
some members of school or church join in the morning or evening
song of praise. Social parlor-gatherings are had, when the people
are cordially invited and are engaged in pleasant conversation and
games, which, while interesting them, tend to their improvement.
Here are often held the mothers meetings and the sewing class, and
daily the people come singly or by twos or threes for special help
and advice, knowing that they are welcome, and that they will find
in some members of the family the wise counsellor and friend.

We can scarcely overestimate the educative influence of these
Mission Homes upon the people. Even where there are but few workers
employed, we cannot wisely dispense with them. Within a year we
have built a small house in a country district where two ladies are
employed as missionary teachers. It is plain, two stories, contains
five rooms, is simply furnished, and cost about $900. There the
ladies keep house, and they testify, as also do other missionaries
from the city station near, that this little “Home” has already
done more for the people as an “object lesson” in home life than
all previous effort in that direction.

In other articles in this department, our friends will learn how
they may share with us in this method of usefulness.

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTER FROM MRS. CHASE, ATLANTA.

Mrs. Nelson has just called with her friend from the North, Mrs.
Barker, who looked over school and domestic work very carefully,
and then began plying me with questions, when Miss Stevenson,
our missionary, dropped in. Mrs. Barker’s face lighted up as she
exclaimed, “Now I have you both together, the teacher and the
missionary, I want to know where you think a little money will do
the most good?” Mrs. Nelson said: “Each one loves her own work
too well to be a competent judge.” Miss Stevenson, you know, is one
of our veterans, been in the field ever since the war. For years
her mind and body were tied in the class-room six hours in the
day, but her heart was in the cabins all the while; and as soon as
she got relief from double duty, how she has put her whole soul
into missionary work! With her pleading eyes upon me, how could I
magnify my work above her’s?

[Illustration: A MISSION HOME.]

Since they left, I’ve been thinking that Mrs. Barker probably
represents many women who wish their mites to go where they are
most interested. Their hearts, like that of every true mother,
yearn over these girls in their great peril, and these boys,
driven from their wretched homes to the street for recreation. If
missionary work, unlike the school, were without organization,
systematic routine, or superintendence, it could not recommend
itself to the cautious. But under the well-defined plan adopted of
associating the missionary labor with the school and church, the
best results are secured.

Much as I love the model school, I can but see that the model home
is its only sure foundation. So the work is all one.

I only hope that the grandeur of “Work for Women in the Home” may
be so felt that the noblest women will be drawn into the service,
and develop such plans and mature such methods that the multitude
of busy mothers and children, all over our land, can cast in their
pennies and feel sure of a wise investment.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS.

H., N.Y.—What are the qualifications required of those who wish
to become lady missionaries? Could one succeed with only a
common-school education?

Sometimes a lady with only a common-school education does better
than one more liberally educated. It depends upon the qualities
of the woman, the executive ability, the tact, the practical good
sense, and knowledge of human nature. Of course, all other things
being equal, the more thorough the education the better the work.

B., N.Y.—What is the cost of supporting a lady missionary, and how
many months during the year is it expedient for her to labor in the
South?

It takes $450 to provide for a lady missionary for one year,
including traveling expenses, board and a moderate salary. The time
of service varies somewhat in different localities. At the extreme
South she can wisely remain eight months of the year; further
north, nine or ten. For other particulars we refer to the March
number of the _Missionary_, which is devoted largely to woman’s
work.

New York.—What assistance can sewing circles and ladies’ societies
render during the summer months that would be most helpful and
timely?

We shall need during the early autumn for replenishing our boarding
departments and mission homes, quilts, sheets, pillow-cases,
blankets, towels, table linen, table ware, and money for furnishing
rooms in new buildings to be occupied by students. Help in either
of these particulars will save so much for the support of the
missionary work.

S., Ct.—What provision is made during vacation for young girls who
have been taken from wretched homes into your institutions? Are
they obliged to return to the temptations and want of their early
associations? If not, what is the cost for their care during this
time?

There is nothing more important for the well-being of many colored
girls than suitable watch and care during their summer vacations.
We have been unable to do much in this direction. A few have been
kept in the different boarding institutions, where the buildings
have been open. These have been given work whenever opportunity
offered. Thirty or thirty-five dollars would provide for a girl in
addition to what she could earn. We would be glad to correspond
with any who are disposed to assist in this way.

R., Mass.—Our children have been accustomed to contribute to the
Dakota schools through the Woman’s Board of Foreign Missions. Does
the A. M. A. wish us to continue our interest in that particular
work?

Certainly it does. We sincerely hope that all those who have been
interested in the support of missions among the Indians will
continue their efforts and forward their gifts to us. The April
number of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY is devoted largely to the work
the Association has accepted from the American Board, and is now
carrying on. We shall need the cordial co-operation and support of
all the friends of the Indians in order to conduct the enlarged
work we have undertaken in their behalf.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ABOUT GIVING PENNIES—SELECTED.]


FIVE KINDS OF PENNIES.

A boy who had a pocket full of coppers, dropped one into the
Missionary-box, laughing as he did so. He had no thought in his
heart about Jesus or the heathen. Was his penny not as light as
_tin_?

Another boy put in a penny and looked around to see if anybody was
praising him. His was the _brass_ penny; not the gift of a lowly
heart, but of a proud spirit.

A third boy gave a penny, saying to himself, “I suppose I must,
because all others do.”

That was an _iron_ penny. It was the gift of a cold, selfish heart.

As a fourth boy dropped his penny into the box he shed a tear, and
his heart said, “Poor heathens! I’m sorry they are so poor, so
ignorant and so miserable.”

That was a _silver_ penny, the gift of a heart full of pity.

But there was one scholar who gave his, saying, “For Thy sake,
Lord Jesus! Oh, that the heathen may hear of Thee, the Saviour of
mankind!”

That was a _golden_ penny, because it was the gift of faith and
love.


THE PENNY BOX.

They were giving away Missionary boxes at a Juvenile Missionary
meeting to the boys and girls who thought they could collect a
little money for sending the Gospel to the heathen. Among those
who asked for a box was a poor child, so poor that the chairman
hesitated at first to give her a box; on consideration, however, he
let her have one.

About a fortnight afterward, this little girl called upon him in
great trouble. He said to her, “Why, Sarah, what are you crying
for? Cannot you get any money to put into your box?”

“No, sir, it is not that,” sobbed Sarah, “it is so full I don’t
know how I shall get any more in, the last penny was so hard to get
in I had to take a hammer to hammer it!”

The gentleman said, “Well, Sarah, I think we can easily get over
that difficulty—here is another box for you.”

But this was not all; when Sarah first applied for a box, she did
so just because her feelings of compassion had been awakened for
the poor heathen children; but while she was busily engaged in
collecting, the thought came into her mind, “What am I collecting
this money for? That the poor _heathen_ children may be taught
about Jesus, but what do _I know about Him myself_?”

Sarah then began to pray, and begged God the Holy Spirit to teach
her about Jesus, and that was the commencement of a new life to the
dear child.


WHAT A PENNY CAN DO.

Willie’s penny made heaven rejoice. It would not have bought more
than a stick or two of candy or given much help to a starving
family. What did he do with it? His sister was a missionary’s wife
in Africa, and the family were filling a box to send her. As one
after another brought their gifts Willie said, “I want to give my
penny.”

“What shall be bought with it?” was the next question. It was
decided to buy a tract and write its history on the margin, and
with a prayer for its success send it on its distant errand.

The box arrived on the mission ground, and among its valuable
contents Willie’s gift was laid away unnoticed and for a while
forgotten. But God’s watchful, all-seeing eye had not forgotten it.
One day a native teacher was starting from the mission station to
go to a school over the mountain. He knew the language well and was
a great help to the missionaries, but he was not a Christian. He
had resisted everything the missionaries had done to make him one.

In looking over some papers, Willie’s tract was discovered,
with writing on the margin, which said that prayer was offered
in America that it might do good. It was handed to the native
teacher. He read it on his journey, and what years of labor by the
missionaries had not done was now brought about by the penny tract.
The man became a sincere Christian. Those who put the tract in his
hand were overcome with joy, and there is joy in heaven over one
sinner that repents.

So you see how Willie’s penny made heaven rejoice.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR MAY, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $141.46.

    Alfred. Mrs. Edith Davis, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            $ 0.35
    Augusta. Joel Spalding                                    10.00
    Bangor. Hammond St. Sab. Sch.                             10.00
    Bangor. Ladies of Third Cong. Ch. ½ Bbl. of
      C., _for Wilmington, N.C._
    Calais. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          25.00
    Dover. W. F. Sampson                                       5.00
    Lebanon. Miss R. H. Weld, _for New Orleans,
      La._                                                    30.00
    Lebanon Center. “J. M.”                                    5.00
    Limerick. S. F. Hayes, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              1.00
    Limington. Miss Arzilla Boothby                            1.59
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             12.00
    Waterford. Centre. Ch. Sab. Sch.                           9.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        32.61


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $341.93.

    Acworth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               11.53
    Alstead. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Canterbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            14.15
    Dover. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           73.63
    East Alstead. Rev. G. A. Beckwith, _for
      Freight_                                                 1.10
    Hancock. Mrs. A. W. Hills                                  3.00
    Hopkinton. “Friend,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                      3.50
    Langdon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Mason. Hon. Dana D. Goodwin, _for Lewis Pub.
      Library, Macon, Ga._                                     2.00
    Milford. Peter and Cynthia S. Burns                       30.00
    Monroe. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.00
    Orfordville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            4.04
    Pembroke. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           18.20
    Portsmouth. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     101.82
    Salem. Mrs. G. D. Kelley                                   1.00
    Swanzey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               12.00
    West Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          16.30
    West Lebanon. Children’s Miss’y Soc., by Mrs.
      T. C. Pease, _for Indian M._                             7.00
    Winchester. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             17.66


  VERMONT, $317.82.

    Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      10.00
    Chelsea. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               25.55
    Clarendon. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ad’l                         7.22
    Corinth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               31.00
    East Berkshire. Cong. Ch.                                 10.00
    Dorset. Women’s Home M. Soc. _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             11.00
    Georgia. Cong. Ch.                                         7.15
    Ludlow. The late Mrs. B. P. Spaulding, by Dr.
      J. N. Moore                                             25.00
    Montpelier. Bethany Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    36.85
    Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               42.00
    Pittsford. Mrs. S. A. Denison                              5.00
    Randolph. Mrs. M. K. Nichols                               2.50
    Saint Albans. A. O. Brainerd, 20; H. M.
      Stevens, 10, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                 30.00
    Pittsford. “D.”                                            1.00
                                                            -------
                                                            $244.27

    LEGACIES.

    Brattleborough. Estate of Mrs. H. M. Linsley,
      by C. F. Thompson                                       30.00
    New Haven. Estate of H. P. Bingham, by
      Jeremiah Powers                                         43.55
                                                           --------
                                                            $317.82


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,354.37.

    Amherst. Officers and Students of Amherst
      College                                                 83.07
    Amherst. Miss Lizzie Stebbing’s S. S. Class,
      _for the poor, Atlanta, Ga._                            10.00
    Andover. Free Ch. and Soc., 224.67; Francis H.
      Johnson, $100; Chapel Ch. and Soc., 92                 416.67
    Andover. G. W. W. Dove, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             27.15
    Ballardvale. Mrs. L. J. T. Burnap                          5.00
    Boston. Shawmut Ch. Sab. Sch., 75; Park St.
      Sab. Sch., 50; Coll. at Prayer Meetings—Mt.
      Vernon Ch., 13; Phillips Ch., 12; Park St.
      Ch., 7; E St. Ch., 6;—Missionary Concert,
      Highland Ch., 11.10; Dea. Silas Potter, 25;
      Miss Kirk, 10; Miss Minnie Woods, 10; Mrs.
      Tead, 5; Mrs. Tyler, 5; “A Friend,” 2; Mr.
      Gates, 1, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                   232.10
    Boston. Mrs. Henry H. Hyde, 10; Mrs. Emily P.
      Eayrs, 5                                                15.00
    Boston. Unitarian Sab. Sch. Pub. Soc., Pkg.
      Books and Papers, _for Macon, Ga._
    Byfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.50
    Cambridge. “A Friend”, _for Indian M._                     5.00
    Canton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          10.00
    Chester. Second Cong. Ch.                                  5.66
    Chelsea. Central Cong. Church and Soc.                    24.46
    Charlestown. “A Friend”                                   10.00
    Clinton. Mrs. Abbie R. Winter                              2.00
    Curtisville. Rev. A. G. Beebee                             5.00
    Dedham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         168.00
    Dorchester. Village Ch. and Soc.                          10.00
    East Bridgewater. Union Ch. and Soc.                      29.96
    Fitchburg. Rev. and Mrs. J. M. R. Eaton, 10;
      “Mrs. C. W. H.,” 10                                     20.00
    Framingham. Plymouth Ch. Sab. Sch., 13.12; “Q.
      N.,” 10                                                 23.12
    Franklin. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., Estate of
      Susan Stewart                                           95.12
    Granby. Miss A. Bliss, _for New Orleans, La._              5.00
    Great Barrington. “A Member of Cong. Ch.”                  1.00
    Groton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                59.30
    Holbrook. Winthrop Ch. and Soc.                           44.00
    Holden. Miss N. Perry                                      2.50
    Holliston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             94.20
    Lakeville. C. L. Ward                                     10.00
    Lee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                      75.00
    Lee. Bbl. of C., _for Selma, Ala._
    Lowell. High St. Ch. and Soc.                             82.75
    Maynard. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. REV.
      EDWIN SMITH, EZRA S. TARBELL and J. W.
      FLOOD, L. Ms.                                           90.00
    Maynard. Young Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._, and to const.
      FRANK H. HARRIMAN, L. M.                                50.00
    Medford. “A Friend.”                                       0.50
    Newton. “A Friend.”                                       40.00
    New Bedford. First Ch. Acushnet                           53.66
    Newburyport. Belleville Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      54.82; North Cong. Ch. and Soc., 22.94.                 77.76
    Newburyport. “Miss T.,” 2; “Mrs. W.,” 1, _for
      Washington, D.C._                                        3.00
    Newton Center. First Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Lady
      Missionary, Chattanooga, Tenn._                         53.68
    North Abington. Cong. Ch.                                  5.00
    Northbridge. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                           2.21
    Palmer. Second Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Peabody. Prof. J. K. Cole, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              2.00
    Rockport. “Pastor’s Class,” _for Indian M._                6.59
    Roxbury. Eliot Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Sandwich. Mrs. Robert Tobey, _for Indian
      Student Aid, Hampton N. & A. Inst._                      5.00
    Springfield. Olivet Ch., 23.78; I. Merrill, 5             28.78
    Springfield. Cong. Ch., Box and 2 Bbls. of C.;
      First Bapt. Ch. (Col.) Box and Bbl. of C.,
      _for Washington, D.C._
    South Egremont. Cong. Ch.                                 10.00
    South Framingham. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.               148.69
    South Framingham. Ladies’ Assn. of Cong. Ch. 2
      Bbls. of Bedding, etc., _for Atlanta U._
    South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    30.00
    Southampton. “L.”                                         10.00
    Stockbridge. Miss Alice Byington                          10.00
    Upton. Freight                                             3.00
    Ware. First Cong. Ch. and Sch.                            34.20
    Wellesley. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Washington,
      D.C._                                                    2.25
    Westborough. Ladies Soc. Of Cong. Ch. Bbl. of
      C., 1 _for Freight_                                      1.00
    West Medway. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 7.89;
      Ladies’ Soc. of Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. and
      Box of C.                                                7.89
    Westminster. “Friends” _for Williamsburg, Ky._            60.66
    West Roxbury. South Evan. Ch. and Soc.                    66.40
    West Springfield. First Cong. Ch., 20; Second
      Cong. Ch., 14.90                                        34.90
    Weymouth and Braintree. Union Cong. Ch.                   28.49
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            27.05
    Winchendon. Atlanta Soc., Box of Bedding, _for
      Atlanta U._
    Worcester. Salem St. Ch., 64; Union Ch. and
      Soc., 30; C. K. W., 50c.                                94.50
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        38.10
                                                          ---------
                                                          $2,654.87

    LEGACIES.

    Fitchburg. Estate of Aaron Eaton, by Daniel
      Messenger and Ezra B. Rockwood, Exrs.                  200.00
    Uxbridge. Estate of Willard Judson by Jacob
      Taft, Ex.                                              500.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $3,354.87


  CONNECTICUT, $2,630.38.

    Birmingham. J. Tomlinson                                  10.00
    Bridgewater. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. EUGENE
      F. ATWOOD L. M.                                         34.37
    Bristol. Chas. Lane, _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                      5.00
    Columbia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              19.26
    Cornwall. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                           16.40
    Enfield. First Cong. Ch.                                  76.57
    Fair Haven. Second Cong. Ch., to const. DEA.
      HENRY W. LOOMIS L. M.                                   30.00
    Gilead. Josiah C. Gilbert                                 10.00
    Guilford. “A Friend in Third Ch.,” _for
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                               2.00
    Hartford. “L. C. D.”                                     100.00
    Hebron. First Cong. Ch.                                    6.51
    Higganum. Cong. Ch.                                       15.00
    Mansfield Center. First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                 10.00
    New Britain. Mrs. Norman Hart                             10.00
    New Haven. College St. Cong. Ch., 100; North
      Ch., 94.55; Church of the Redeemer, 80; Hon.
      S. Wells Williams, 20; “A Friend,” 1                   295.55
    New Milford. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              2.50
    New Preston. Cong. Ch. (10 of which _for Work
      for Women, Savannah, Ga._)                              50.00
    Plainville. Cong. Ch.                                     55.87
    Plantsville. Mrs. Mary Hotchkiss, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         5.00
    Poquonock. Cong. Ch.                                      15.75
    Reading. Cong. Ch.                                        27.00
    Simsbury. Cong. Ch.                                       45.09
    Somerville. Cong. Ch.                                     15.10
    Sound Beach. Cong. Ch.                                    12.80
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      76.78
    Waterbury. Second Cong. Ch.                              427.69
    Windsor Locks. Cong Ch.                                   84.56
    ——. “A Friend of Missions”                               571.58
                                                          ---------
                                                          $2,030.38

    LEGACIES.

    Norwich. Estate of Mrs. F. B. Kellogg, by John
      C. Kellogg, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                 100.00
    Southport. Estate of Frederick Marquand                  500.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $2,630.38


  NEW YORK, $1,081.84.

    Albany. “M.”                                              50.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Ch., 552.74; Julius
      Davenport, 100                                         652.74
    Brooklyn. Freedmen’s Helpers, _for Macon, Ga._            15.00
    Brooklyn. Bbl. of C., _for Washington, D.C._
    Cazenovia. Mrs. H. L. Ward                                 0.50
    Cortland. Mrs. E. B. Dean                                  5.00
    Coventry. “Friends,” _for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst._                                                   0.30
    East Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                      24.00
    Goshen. Miss Fannie E. Crane                               2.00
    Ithaca. First Cong. Ch.                                   65.00
    Mount Vernon. J. Van Santvoord                            10.00
    New York. Seeley Bros. (Paint), _for Lewis
      Pub. Library, Macon, Ga._                               10.50
    North Evans. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of First
      Cong. Ch.                                                4.80
    Northville. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                           20.00
    Pekin. Miss Oliva Root, 4; Louisa Coleman, 1               5.00
    Phelps. Ladies’ Soc., by Mrs. J. R. Snow, _for
      Student Aid, Emerson Inst._                             10.00
    West Hebron. “A Friend,” 5; P. B. Larkin, 2                7.00
                                                            -------
                                                            $881.84

    LEGACY.

    Mount Morris. Estate of Mary F. Albright                 200.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $1,081.84


  NEW JERSEY, $137.25.

    Bergen Point. Reformed Ch.                                75.00
    Newark. First Cong., 32.25; “A Friend,” 30 to
      const. FLORA E. SMALLEY L. M.                           62.25


  PENNSYLVANIA, $30.50.

    Philadelphia. T. D. Quincy                                20.00
    Philadelphia. Chas. W. Alexander, 10, _for
      housekeeping cottage, Atlanta U._; Rachel
      Grellet, 13 vols. _for Library, Atlanta U._             10.00
    Prentissvale. L. S. Allen, 50c.; Sab. Sch.,
      Box of Papers                                            0.50


  OHIO, $6,039.95.

    Akron. Cong. Ch.                                         174.62
    Andover. Cong. Ch.                                         0.52
    Chardon. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            15.00
    Claridon. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  6.57
    Elyria. First Cong. Ch.                                  110.33
    Granville. G. P. Bancroft                                  2.00
    Guildford. Trustees of First Cong. Ch.                   271.00
    Hudson. S. Straight, _for Boy’s Hall, Straight
      U._                                                  5,000.00
    Huntsburg. Mrs. M. E. Millard, _for Macon, Ga._            1.75
    Kent. Cong. Ch.                                            5.49
    Kingsville. Myron Whiting                                 50.00
    Mansfield. Ladies Beneficent Soc. of First
      Cong. Ch., 90, to const. MRS. DR. A. E.
      KEYES, MRS. G. W. DE CAMP, and MRS. M. B.
      BUSHNELL L. Ms.; Young People’s Mission
      Circle of First Cong. Church, 90, to const.
      MISS ANNA ADAMS, MISS LULU CARTER and WILL
      H. BLYMER, L. Ms.                                      180.00
    Marietta. First Cong. Ch.                                 63.52
    North Kingsville. Rev. E. J. Comings, 10; B.
      S. Noyes, 5                                             15.00
    North Monroeville. Freight                                 1.75
    Norwalk. First Cong. Ch., to const. DEA.
      CHARLES W. MANAHAN L. M.                                30.00
    Oberlin. “Friends,” _for Williamsburg, Ky._                3.00
    Richwood. E. D. Jones                                      5.00
    Suffield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.00
    Sullivan. Cong. Ch.                                       15.00
    Wakeman. Mrs. Wm. Terry, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                45.00
    Warrensville. Mrs. Mary Walkden, _for Chinese
      M._                                                     10.00
    Wauseon. Joel Bingham, 1; Others, 40c., _for
      McIntosh, Ga._                                           1.40
    West Andover. Cong. Ch.                                   13.00
    Wellington. Rev. James A. Daly                             5.00


  INDIANA, $7.00.

    Michigan City. “Golden Links,” _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         5.50
    Sparta. John Hawkswell                                     1.50


  ILLINOIS, $3,058.06.

    Bondville. “A Friend”                                      5.00
    Chicago. South Cong Ch., 51.42; N. E. Cong.
      Ch., 48.44                                              99.86
    Chicago. John Fairbanks, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            50.00
    Chicago. Ladies Soc. of N. E. Cong. Ch., 27;
      Ladies Miss’y Soc. of Lincoln Park Ch., 25,
      _for Lady Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                     52.00
    Dundee. Cong. Ch.                                         18.21
    Earlville. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. S. C.
      DUPES L. M.                                             31.00
    Elmwood. Mrs. L. R. Royce, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 5.00
    Galena. “A Friend”                                         2.00
    Galesburg. Woman’s Miss’y Soc. of Brick Cong.
      Ch.                                                     10.00
    Geneseo. First Cong. Ch.                                  50.00
    Glencoe. Cong. Ch.                                        40.00
    Granville. Merry Workers, Box of Bedding, _for
      Stone Hall, S. U._
    Hillsdale. Cong Ch., to const. MRS. L. P.
      HASKELL L. M.                                           50.00
    Lake Forest. Mrs. W. H. Ferry, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Lawn Ridge. A Crawford, _for Mendi M._                    20.00
    Lewistown. Mrs. Myron Phelps                              50.00
    Lombard. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., 2.56; Box of C.
      and 1.50 _for Freight, for Lady Missionary,
      Mobile, Ala._                                            4.06
    Morrison. Cong. Ch., to const. WM. WALLACE and
      HARMON E. BURR                                          60.00
    Normal. Cong. Ch.                                          5.36
    Payson. Cong. Ch.                                         30.00
    Port Byron. “Mission Circle”                               6.00
    Princeton. “H.”                                            5.00
    Princeville. Wm. C. Stevens                                5.00
    Quincy. “A Friend,” to const. ALVIN R. BROWN
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Rockford. Second Cong. Ch.                               265.60
    Rose Grove. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     13.00
    Sheffield. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 3.58
    Thawville. Cong Ch.                                       13.42
    Tonica. F. A. Wood                                        10.00
    Tonica. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                26.58
    Udina. Cong. Ch.                                           2.89
    Wilmette. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                 1.50
    Wilmette. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                12.50
    Winnebago. Gertrude F. Milton                              5.00
    Winnetka. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., 8.50; Bbl.
      of C. and 2, _for Freight, for Little Rock,
      Ark._                                                   10.50
    Winnetka. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           15.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,058.06

    LEGACY.

    Chicago. Estate of Mrs. Lucy Warner, by Heman
      Baldwin and D. G. Hamilton, Exrs.                    2,000.00
                                                           --------
                                                           $3058.06


  MICHIGAN. $451.70.

    Adrian. “Friends,” _for Williamsburg, Ky._                 1.20
    Benzonia. Rev. Joseph S. Fisher, to const.
      GEORGE L. FISHER L. M.                                  30.00
    Calumet. Robert Dobbie                                    40.00
    Clinton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid.
      Fisk U._                                                10.00
    Greenville. Mrs. A. J. Ecker, _for McIntosh,
      Ga._                                                     2.00
    Lamont. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    5.00
    Lansing. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                               40.00
    Utica. First Cong. Ch.                                    13.00
    Webster. First Cong. Ch.                                  10.50
                                                            -------
                                                            $151.70

    LEGACY.

    Kalamazoo. Estate of Sarah D. White ($30 of
      which to const HELEN J. WHITE L. M.), by D.
      T. Allen, Ex.                                          300.00
                                                           --------
                                                            $451.70


  IOWA, $265.87.

    Belle Plaine. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            6.50
    Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                 28.00
    Corning. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            6.00
    Council Bluffs. “Friends,” _for Williamsburg,
      Ky._                                                     1.00
    Cresco. Cong. Ch.                                          7.90
    Decorah. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           25.00
    Dunlap. Mrs. P. K. Smith, deceased, by Mrs. W.
      T. Preston                                              10.00
    Eldon. R. R. Cong. Ch.                                     2.50
    Elkader. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            1.50
    Garwin. Talmon Dewey                                       2.00
    Iowa City. Two Bales of C., Miss Hattie O.
      Calkins, 1, _for New Orleans, La._                       1.00
    Lyons. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           10.00
    Maquoketa. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             35.82
    McGregor. Women’s Miss’y Soc., Bbl. of C. Val.
      36, _for New Orleans, La._
    Miles. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           10.00
    Monona. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                            4.00
    Muscatine. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           10.00
    Muscatine. Cong. Ch.                                      56.25
    Osage. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           10.00
    Oskaloosa. Sab. Sch., _for Lady Missionary,
      New Orleans, La._                                       13.00
    Oskaloosa. S. R. Pettit                                    2.00
    Ottumwa. First Cong. Ch.                                  23.40


  WISCONSIN, $1,626.41.

    Appleton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                           10.00
    Arena. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                            4.00
    Janesville. Cong. Ch., 14.75; C. Bassett, 10              24.75
    Janesville. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                            7.25
    Jefferson. Mission Band, _for Student Aid, T.
      C. & N. Inst._                                           1.50
    Menomonee. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                12.50
    Salem. “Friends,” _for Williamsburg, Ky._                 21.00
    Sheboygan. James H. Mead, _for Lewis Pub.
      Library, Macon, Ga._                                     5.00
    Sheboygan. Dea. D. Brown’s S. S. Class, _for
      Macon, Ga._                                              1.00
    Sparta. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                            6.00
    Trempeleau. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                            5.70
    Watertown. Cong. Ch.                                      23.35
    West Salem. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            11.50
    West Salem. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 6.30; Mrs. F.
      M. Montague, 3; _for Lady Missionary,
      Montgomery, Ala._                                        9.30
    Whitewater. First Cong. Ch., 113.17; Geo. S.
      Marsh, 10                                              123.17
                                                            -------
                                                            $266.02

    LEGACIES.

    Madison. Estate of Amanda Nesmith, by Chas. E.
      Shepard                                                960.39
    Walworth. Estate of Mrs. L. R. S. Colton, by
      F. W. Maxen, Ex.                                       400.00
                                                            -------
                                                          $1,626.41


  MINNESOTA, $111.52.

    Faribault. “Helping Hands,” _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            19.00
    Glyndon. “The Church at Glyndon.”                         12.27
    Plainview. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                             5.00
    Mazeppa. Cong. Ch.                                         7.50
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 59.22
    Worthington. Union Cong. Ch.                               8.53


  MISSOURI, $32.50.

    Saint Louis. Fifth Cong. Ch.                              32.50


  KANSAS, $29.50.

    Alma. Cong. Ch.                                            2.08
    Burlington. John Morris                                    5.00
    Fort Scott. First Cong. Ch.                                3.30
    Manhattan. “Father and Daughter,” by Rev. R.
      M. Tunnell                                              10.00
    Olathe. First Cong. Ch., 6; and Sab. Sch, 3.12.            9.12


  NEBRASKA, $70.00.

    Genoa. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
    Irvington. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    McCook. Rev. Geo. Dungan                                  10.00
    ——. “An old friend in Nebraska,” _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          50.00


  COLORADO, $15.25.

    West Denver. Cong. Ch. 12.04; and Sab. Sch., 3.21        15.25


  CALIFORNIA, $2,779.10.

    Lugonia. Lugonia Sab. Sch.                                 1.30
    National City. J. E. Cushman                             120.00
    San Francisco. The California Chinese Mission          2,657.80


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $82.53.

    Washington. First Cong. Ch., 70.53; Howard U.,
      Mon. Con. Coll., 12                                     82.53


  MARYLAND, $100.00.

    Baltimore. “A Friend”                                    100.00


  VIRGINIA, 87.00.

    Herndon. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00


  KENTUCKY, $199.75.

    Ashland. Hugh Means                                       10.00
    Lexington. Normal Sch. Tuition                            48.50
    Louisville. Warren Memorial Presb. Ch. Sab.
      Sch., _for Indian M._                                   40.00
    Williamsburg. Tuition                                    101.25


  TENNESSEE, $420.95.

    Knoxville. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          202.40
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              208.55


  NORTH CAROLINA, $239.75.

    Raleigh. Miss E. P. Hayes, 15; “Friends,”
      10.15., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                   25.15
    Wilmington. Tuition, 209.60; Cong. Ch., 5                214.60


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $357.80.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition, 347.80;
      Plymouth Ch., 10                                       357.80


  GEORGIA, $954.35.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, 226,25; Rent,
      3; “Visitors,” 100; First Cong. Ch., 30;
      PROF. ALBERT SALISBURY, 30, to const.
      himself L. M.                                          389.25
    Atlanta. Hon. W. A. Huff, 10; Gen. John R.
      Lewis, 10, _for Lewis Public Library, Macon,
      Ga._                                                    20.00
    Macon. Citizens of Macon, 178.50; Subscribers,
      14, _for Lewis Public Library_                         192.50
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition, 148.50; Cong.
      Ch., 16.50                                             165.00
    McIntosh. Dorchester Academy, Tuition                      0.65
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, 119.85; Rent,
      10; Cong. Ch., 57.10                                   186.95


  ALABAMA, $532.41.

    Marion. Tuition, 12; Cong. Ch., 6.50                      18.50
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition                           184.25
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Selma. First Cong. Ch.                                    29.00
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition, 280.66;
      Cong. Ch., 10                                          290.66


  MISSISSIPPI, $1,164.75.

    Tougaloo. State Appropriation, 1,000; Tougaloo
      U., Tuition, 111.85; Tent, 52.90                     1,164.75


  LOUISIANA, $156.00.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        156.00


  TEXAS, $330.75.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Tuition                 325.75
    Austin. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, T. C. &
      N. Inst._                                                5.00


  INCOMES, $416.75.

    Theological Fund, _for Howard U._                        141.00
    Graves Scholarship Fund, _for Talladega C._              125.00
    Stone Scholarship Fund, _for Talladega C._                 0.75
    Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._                      100.00
    Haley Scholarship Fund, _for Fisk U._                     50.00
                                                        -----------
      Total for May                                      $27,487.70
      Total from Oct. 1 to May 31                       $178,884.61
                                                        ===========

         *       *       *       *       *


  FOR ENDOWMENT FUND.

    Jefferson, Ohio. Mrs. Nancy M. Stone and Miss
      Abbie Stone $500 each, _for Scholarship
      Fund, Talladega C._                                  1,000.00
    Stone Professorship, _for Howard U._                     500.00

         *       *       *       *       *


  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions                                             43.84
    Previously acknowledged                                  591.55
                                                             ------
      Total                                                 $635.39
                                                           ========

         *       *       *       *       *


    RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, E.
      Palache, Treasurer, from Jan. 24, to May 24,
      1883.
    FROM CHURCHES: Murphy’s, Cong Ch., Rev. A.
      Ostrom, 2.—Oakland, First Cong Ch.,
      12.95.—San Francisco, First Cong. Ch., Two
      Annual Members, 4; Bethany Ch. Monthly
      Offerings, 101.25.—Sonoma, Cong. Ch., Rev.
      and Mrs. H. H. Wickoff, 4.90                           125.10
    FROM AUXILIARY MISSIONS: Marysville, Chinese
      Monthly Offering, 29.50; Annual Member, 2;
      “Three Friends,” 3.—Oroville, Chinese
      Monthly Offerings, 14.65; Annual Member
      (Chinese), 2.—Petaluma, Chinese Monthly
      Offerings, 18.60.—Sacramento, Chinese
      Monthly Offerings, 30.—Santa Barbara,
      Chinese Monthly Offerings, 24.—Santa Cruz,
      Chinese Monthly Offerings, 12.50; Collection
      at Anniversary, 14.45; Annual Members,
      8.—Stockton, Chinese Monthly Offerings, 12             170.70
    FROM INDIVIDUALS: Oakland, Mrs. Nathaniel
      Gray, 5.—San Francisco, Balfour, Guthrie &
      Co., 1,000; J.J. Felt, 100; Mrs. Samuel
      Perkins, 25, to const. SAMUEL PERKINS,
      L.M.—Liverpool, Eng., Hon. Stephen
      Williamson, M.P., 500; Alexander Balfour
      Esq. 500                                             2,130.00
    FROM EASTERN FRIENDS: Bangor, Me., Central
      Cong. Ch., 100; E. R. Burpee, 100.—Norwich,
      Conn., Mrs. S. A. Huntington, 25, to const.
      MOSES PIERCE, L. M.—Iowa, Grinnell, Alonzo
      Steele, 5; Miss Mary E. Brewer’s, S. S.
      Class, 2                                               232.00
                                                          ---------
      Total                                               $2,657.80
                                                          =========

                                        H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.
                                          56 Reade St., New York.




STATISTICS FOR 1882.


CHURCHES: _In the South_—In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia,
1; North Carolina, 9; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 14; Kentucky,
7; Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 2; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana,
17; Mississippi, 5; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 2.
Total, 88.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing number of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                     EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
                   DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           J. & R. LAMB,

                        59 Carmine Street.

                  Sixth Ave. cars pass the door.

                          [Illustration]

                              BANNERS

                             IN SILK,

                           NEW DESIGNS.

                         CHURCH FURNITURE.

                    SEND FOR HAND BOOK BY MAIL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        PEARLS IN THE MOUTH

                          [Illustration]

                       Beauty and Fragrance

                 Are communicated to the mouth by

                             SOZODONT

which renders the _teeth pearly white_, the gums rosy, and the
_breath sweet_. By those who have used it, it is regarded as an
indispensable adjunct of the toilet. It thoroughly _removes tartar_
from the teeth, without injuring the enamel.

SOLD BY DRUGGISTS EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          VIOLIN OUTFITS

                          [Illustration]

                         Biggest Bargains
                            ever known.

                               From
                               $1.75
                                to
                               $25.

                        ☞ SPECIAL BARGAIN.

                         PAGANINI VIOLIN,

Celebrated for fine tone, finish. Italian strings, fine pegs,
inlaid pearl tail-piece, fine long bow, with ivory and silvered
frog, in violin box. Book of Instruction, with 558 pieces music,
by express for $3.50. Satisfaction guaranteed, or money refunded.
A better outfit cannot be purchased elsewhere for $10. Send
stamp for large Catalogue. =G. H. W. BATES & CO.=, Importers and
Manufacturers, 106 Sudbury St., Boston, Mass.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    CHEAPEST BOOK IN THE WORLD.

=The New American Dictionary, Price Only $1.00=, CONTAINS 1,000
ENGRAVINGS AND 100 PAGES MORE THAN ANY OTHER BOOK OF THE KIND
EVER PUBLISHED. This useful and elegant volume is a Library and
Encyclopedia of general knowledge, as well as the best Dictionary
in the world. Superbly bound in cloth and gilt. No pocket
affair, but a large volume. It contains every useful word in the
English language, with its true meaning, derivation, spelling,
and pronunciation, and a vast amount of absolutely necessary
information upon Science, Mythology, Biography, American History,
Insolvent, Land, and Interest Laws, etc., being a =Perfect Library
of Reference=. Webster’s Dictionary costs $9.00, and the New
American Dictionary costs only $1.00.

[Illustration]

                     Read what the Press Says:

“We have examined the New American Dictionary, and find it is a
very valuable book.”—HOUSE AND HOME. “We have never seen its equal,
either in price, finish, or contents.”—THE ADVOCATE. “Worth ten
times the money.”—TRIBUNE AND FARMER. “A perfect Dictionary and
library reference.”—LESLIE ILLUSTRATED NEWS. “We have frequent
occasion to use the New American Dictionary in our office, and
regard it well worth the price.”—CHRISTIAN UNION. “With the New
American Dictionary in the library for reference, many other much
more expensive works can be dispensed with, and ignorance of his
country, history, business, law, etc., is inexcusable in any
man.”—SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. “A valuable addition to any library.”—N.
Y. SUN. “There is more real worth than in most books at ten times
the cost.”—N. Y. COMMERCIAL WORLD. Note the price, =$1.00=, post
paid; =2= copies for =$1.75=.

=Extraordinary Offer.= If any person will get up a Club of Ten, at
$1.00 each, we will send Free as a premium the American Waterbury
Stem Winding Watch. For a =Club of 15= we will send free a Solid
Silver Hunting Case Watch. For a =Club of 30= we will send free a
Lady’s Solid Gold Hunting Case Watch. For a =Club of 50= we will
send free a Gent’s Solid Gold Hunting Case Watch. Send a Dollar at
once for a sample copy. You can easily secure one of these watches
in a day or two, during your leisure time evenings. As to our
reliability, we can refer to the commercial agencies or any express
company in this city. Address

            WORLD MANUFACTURING CO., 122 Nassau Street, New York.


                           THIS SPLENDID
                     COIN SILVER HUNTING CASE
                            WATCH FREE

            To any person who will send us an order for

                                15
                           NEW AMERICAN
                           DICTIONARIES

                        At One Dollar Each.

[Illustration]

Any person can readily secure Fifteen Subscribers in one or two
hours, or in a single evening. If you want a good SOLID COIN SILVER
WATCH, and want to get it WITHOUT MONEY, you can easily do so. Send
ONE DOLLAR for a sample copy of the NEW AMERICAN DICTIONARY, and
see how easily you can get up a club of FIFTEEN.

If you don’t care to get up a club yourself, will you kindly hand
this to some person whom you think would like to get the watch. 48
page illustrated catalogue FREE. Send money by registered letter or
P. O. money order. Send all orders to

             WORLD MANUFACTURING CO., 122 Nassau Street, New York.


  WORLD MANUFACTURING CO.:                          Nov. 21, 1882.

Find inclosed $30 for 30 New American Dictionaries and the Ladies’
Solid Gold Watch. I secured Thirty Subscribers in one day, and have
several more promised. Every one likes the Dictionary, and all I
have seen have subscribed.

                                   MISS LAURA COIL, Annapolis, Mo.

   OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR OF THE TREASURY, POST-OFFICE DEPARTMENT,}
                              WASHINGTON D.C., Jan. 29, 1883.    }

WORLD MANUFACTURING CO.:

☞ The New American Dictionary ordered Jan. 15 at hand. I obtained
fourteen subscribers in about as many minutes last Saturday, and
find the Post-Office Department is a good field to work in. The
book proves to be just the thing for office use. I have many more
promised, and will send another larger order. Send the Silver Watch
as premium for this club. Respectfully,

                                                   ROBERT H. WOOD.

_Hundreds of Testimonials like the above._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. to 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                    In First Mortgage Bonds ON

                         IMPROVED FARMS in

                          Iowa, Minnesota

                            and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.


          _11 Years’ Experience. Loans Absolutely Safe._

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


            _BRANCH BANKS AT MITCHELL AND HURON, D.T._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  SMITH
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS]

                           ARE THE BEST.


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.

                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  THE
  RISING SUN
  STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


            CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS’ NEW PUBLICATIONS.


                   THE WISDOM OF HOLY SCRIPTURE.

  With Principal Reference to Skeptical Objections. By REV. J. H.
  MCILVANE, D.D. 1 vol. crown 8vo, $2.50.

“‘_The Wisdom of Holy Scripture_’ is no ordinary book. It handles
some of the toughest questions of theology and of sociology with
original and intelligent strength. The author does not get outside
the limits of evangelical orthodoxy, nor does he give sign of being
fretted or hampered by the restraints of those limitations.”—_The
Independent._


                ENGLISH STYLE IN PUBLIC DISCOURSE.

  With Special Relation to the Usages of the Pulpit. By Prof.
  AUSTIN PHELPS, D.D., author of “The Theory of Preaching,” “Men
  and Books,” etc. 1 vol. 12mo, $2.

“This volume may be read, and not only read, but studied, with much
profit by every one who has occasion to speak in public or to write
for the public.... We have here a treatise on pulpit style broad
enough to be that and something more—a satisfactory treatise on all
English style.... It will be a great help to any who are striving
to learn how to write and speak their mother tongue with precision,
force and grace.”—_The Examiner._


                  A CRITIQUE OF DESIGN ARGUMENTS.

  A Historical Review and Free Examination of the Methods of
  Reasoning in Natural Theology. By L. E. HICKS, Professor of
  Geology in Denison University, Granville, Ohio. 1 vol. crown
  8vo, $2.

“The book, as a compendium of thought on this vast theme, is one
which no student can afford to do without.... We venture the
prediction that Professor Hicks’ fascinating and in every way
admirable treatise will become recognized as one of the works
which not only mark but help to make an epoch in speculative
thought.”—_The Examiner._


                           FINAL CAUSES.

  By PAUL JANET, Member of the French Academy. Translated from
  the Second French Edition. With a Preface by Robert Flint,
  D.D., LL.D. 1 vol. 8vo, $2.50.

“No book of greater importance in the realm of theological
philosophy has appeared during the past twenty years than Paul
Janet’s ‘Final Causes.’ The central idea of the work is one which
the whole course of scientific discussion has made the burning
question of the day, viz., that final causes are not inconsistent
with physical causation.”—_Independent._


                 DR. McCOSH’S PHILOSOPHIC SERIES.

  No. 1.—Criteria of Diverse Kinds of Truth, as opposed to
  Agnosticism. Being a Treatise on Applied Logic.

  No. 2.—Energy, Efficient and Final Cause. By James McCosh,
  D.D., LL.D.

  No. 3.—Development: What it Can Do and What it Cannot Do. Each
  1 vol. 12mo, paper. 50 cents.

“It is not unlikely to prove true in the end that the most useful
popular service which Dr. McCosh has rendered to the cause of
right thinking and to a sound philosophy of life, is his proposed
‘Philosophic Series.’”—_The Independent._


                          LOGIC AND LIFE.

  With Other Sermons. By Rev. H. S. HOLLAND, M.A., Senior Student
  of Christ Church, Oxford. With an Introductory notice by
  President Noah Porter. 1 vol. 8vo, $1.50.

“Originality of thought and expression, a glowing but well-ordered
imagination, profound spirituality and reflective power, and a
sustained eloquence that burns on every page, are the current
characteristics of these remarkable sermons.”—_Christian
Intelligencer._


                    THE BEGINNINGS OF HISTORY,

  According to the Bible and the Traditions of Oriental Peoples.
  From the Creation of Man to the Deluge. By FRANCOIS LENORMANT,
  Professor of Archæology at the National Library of France,
  etc., etc. (Translated from the Second French Edition.) With an
  introduction by FRANCIS BROWN, Assistant Professor in Biblical
  Philology, Union Theological Seminary. 1 vol. 12mo, 750 pp.,
  $2.50.

“The work is one that deserves to be studied by all students of
ancient history, and in particular by ministers of the gospel,
whose office requires them to interpret the Scriptures, and who
ought not to be ignorant of the latest and most interesting
contribution of science to the elucidation of the sacred
volume.”—_New York Tribune._


                  THE GOSPEL OF THE SECULAR LIFE.

  With a Prefatory Essay, by the Rev. W. H. FREEMANTLE, Canon of
  Canterbury. 1 vol. 12mo, $1.

“There is the genuine ring of Christian manliness in Canon
Freemantle’s ‘Gospel of the Secular Life.’ ... His book is a
strong and earnest plea for practical unity among Christian
denominations; for the supremacy of Christ in the secular life, and
for the grounding of all earthly pursuits upon the firm rock of
Christianity.”—_The Sunday-School Times._


                      OLD TESTAMENT REVISION.

  A Handbook for English Readers. By ALEXANDER ROBERTS, D.D.,
  author of “Companion to the Revised Version of the English New
  Testament.” 1 vol. 12mo, $1.

“We do not know any work of the same compass which will remove as
many misapprehensions and convey as much information about the Old
Testament Scriptures.”—_Episcopal Register._


                          ON THE DESERT.

  With a Brief Review of Recent Events in Egypt. By Rev. HENRY
  M. FIELD, D.D., author of “From the Lakes of Killarney to the
  Golden Horn,” and “From Egypt to Japan.” 1 vol. crown 8vo, with
  a map, $2.

“It ought to be in every Sunday-school library and on every home
table. The minister’s library need not disdain it. We hope Dr.
Field will live long, travel much, never fail to make abundant
notes and give them, with subsequent reflections, in volumes that
will be sure to prolong his usefulness and the gathered treasures
of many days. Books of travel like these preach powerfully both of
the ways of man and the ways of God.”—_Christian Union._


                THE RELIGIONS OF THE ANCIENT WORLD.

  Including Egypt, Assyria and Babylonia, Persia, India,
  Phœnicia, Etruria, Greece, Rome. By GEORGE RAWLINSON, M.A.,
  author of the “Origin of Nations,” etc. 1 vol. 12mo, $1.

“The historical studies which have elevated this author’s works
to the highest position have made him familiar with those beliefs
which once directed the world’s thought, and he has done literature
no better service than in this little volume.”—_N. Y. Christian
Advocate._


                    THE BEGINNINGS OF HISTORY,

  According to the Bible and the Traditions of the Oriental
  Peoples. From the Creation of Man to the Deluge. By FRANCOIS
  LENORMANT, Professor of Archæology at the National Library
  of France, etc. (Translated from the Second French Edition.)
  With an introduction by FRANCIS BROWN, Associate Professor in
  Biblical Philology, Union Theological Seminary. 1 vol. 12mo,
  750 pages, $2.50.

“M. Lenormant is not only a believer in revelation, but a devout
confessor of what came by Moses as well as of what came by Christ.
In this exploration of Chaldean, Babylonian, Assyrian and Phœnician
tradition he discloses a prodigality of thought and skill allied to
great variety of pursuit and diligent manipulation of what he has
secured. He ‘spoils the Egyptians’ by boldly using, for Christian
purposes, materials, which, if left unused, might be turned against
the credibility of the Mosaic records. From the mass of tradition
here examined it would seem that if these ancient legends have
a common basis of truth, the first part of Genesis stands more
generally related to the religious history of mankind, than if it
is taken primarily as one account, by one man, to one people.”—_The
New Englander._


                          [Illustration]

     _These books are for sale by all Booksellers, or will be
           sent, post-paid, on receipt of the price, by_

      CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS, 743 & 745 Broadway, New York.

                 *       *       *       *       *


ATKIN & PROUT, Printers, 12 Barclay St., New York.

                 *       *       *       *       *




Transcribers Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Period spellings and authors’ grammar have been
retained. Inconsistent hyphenation retained due to the multiplicity
of authors.

Changed “mision” to “mission” on page 195 (the mission in
connection with the one maintained)

Changed “Fragance” to “Fragrance” on page 223 (Beauty and
Fragrance).

Changed “Eturia” to “Etruria” on the back cover (Etruria, Greece,
Rome).

Changed “Phenician” to “Phœnician” on the back cover (Phœnician
tradition).







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 37, NO. 7, JULY, 1883 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.