[Illustration: NOVEMBER, 1883.

VOL. XXXVII.

NO. 11.

The American Missionary]




CONTENTS


                                                         PAGE.


  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETING—TWELVE MONTHS—THE HOUR                 321
    PARAGRAPHS                                            323
    BENEFACTIONS                                          324
    CHURCH AND PARSONAGE, ANNISTON, ALA. (cut)            325
    GENERAL NOTES—AFRICA, CHINESE, INDIAN                 326
    CHINESE DRESSED FOR RAINY WEATHER (cut)               327


  THE SOUTH.

    VACATIONING                                           329
    A WANT—READING ROOMS                                  331
    GENEROUS WORD FROM THE SOUTH                          333
    APOSTOLIC SALUTATION—NOTICES ON THE OPENING OF
      SCHOOLS                                             334
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                  335


  THE INDIANS.

    VISIT TO FORT SULLY INDIAN MISSION                    336
    MISSION HOME, FORT SULLY (cut)                        337


  THE CHINESE.

    REPORT OF SUPERINTENDENT                              339


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    HELP AT PUBLIC MEETINGS—THE LORD’S GARDEN             340


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    THE STORY THAT SUBDUED HIM                            341
    BRING IN THE TITHES                                   342


  RECEIPTS                                                343


  CONSTITUTION                                            347


  PROPOSED CONSTITUTION                                   348

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:
         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
          Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y.,
                      as second-class matter.

                 *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRESIDENT.

  Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


TREASURER.

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


AUDITORS.

  M. F. READING.
  WM. A. NASH.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN
ABBOTT, ALONZO S. BALL, A. S. BARNES, C. T. CHRISTENSEN, FRANKLIN
FAIRBANKS, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES
A. HULL, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, WM. H. WARD, A. L.
WILLISTON


DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _Boston_.
  Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
  Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to
the Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting
fields, to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of
the “American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New
York Office; letters for the Bureau of Woman’s Work, to Miss D. E.
Emerson at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *


                  [Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS, DIMINISHED
                         VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                    LIFE INS. CO. OF NEW YORK,

                      _156 and 158 Broadway_.


                        THIRTY-THIRD YEAR.


  DESCRIPTION—One of the oldest, strongest, best.

  POLICIES—Incontestable, non-forfeitable, definite cash
  surrender values.

  RATES—Safe, low, and participating or not, as desired.

  RISKS carefully selected.

  PROMPT, liberal dealing.

GENERAL AGENTS AND CANVASSERS WANTED in desirable territory, to
whom permanent employment and liberal compensation will be given.

Address

  H. STOKES, President.

  H. Y. WEMPLE, Sec’y.
  J. L. HALSEY, 1st V.-P.
  S. N. STEBBINS, Act’y.
  H. B. STOKES, 2d V.-P.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

         VOL. XXXVII.        NOVEMBER, 1883.       NO. 11.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNUAL MEETING.

We are happy to inform our friends that very satisfactory
arrangements have been perfected for our Annual Meeting. Railroad
facilities and steamboat accommodations have been granted at
reduced rates and an able corps of speakers will be present and
participate in the meeting. As this number of the MISSIONARY will
reach our readers at an earlier date than usual, we give full
particulars on the 4th page cover.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Twelve Months._—Receipts from collections and donations,
$186,200.56, from legacies, $126,366.73, making a total of
$312,567.29, an increase of $14,982.84 over the total for last
year. This encouraging showing is to be credited to legacies which
have been unusually large. Our payments for the year, less balance
in hand at the beginning of the year, have been $312,018.97,
leaving a balance in hand for the new year of $548.32. For this
result we rejoice and give thanks to God. We have not been able
to accomplish all that has been pressing upon us from our several
mission fields, but our faith is strong and we ask for still larger
gifts and more extended efforts in the fields now white for the
harvest.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE HOUR.

The hour is at hand for the annual review of the work and wants
of this Association. The rapid progress of events amid which its
influence is a constant factor, necessitates vigilant study, wise
deliberation, and prompt action. There are divine favors to seek,
interests to hold, opportunities to embrace, and hindrances to
overcome.

Possibly nothing is more to be feared among the latter than apathy.
The belief that a work is well in hand, successful, hopeful,
helpful, often gives a sense of rest that fosters unconcern,
or little concern, for its entrenchment and enlargement. This
condition weakens the intensity of prayer and relaxes effort. More
than this, apathy among the friends of a work like ours is liable
to give way for misconception or lack of comprehension of its place
in the religious destinies of mankind.

We have a mission for the promotion of righteousness. Our success
is not to be measured by the rule, or the balance, but by what it
accomplishes in the establishment of right principles. It must be
judged of by the tone it gives, and not by the zone it occupies.
The business of this Association is not for one clime, but for
all climes. It aims to suppress ignorance, oppression, misrule,
poverty, sin and shame, and to plant and nourish those ennobling
truths which yield peace, plenty and life everlasting. Our very
fundamental principles debar us from doing anything less broad and
catholic than that directed alike against caste, oppression and all
injustice. We must be left free to apply our benefits where the
evils we seek to destroy have their strongholds. We are bound to
recognize moral conditions, but not color. Color is not guilt or
essential misfortune.

Another hindrance to fear is the attention likely to be drawn to
the political aspects of our work. These have their place and
rightful claims. Good government is helpful to good learning
and the interests of religion, but the object of a missionary
society is primarily to promote pure Christianity. While it enters
amid all shades of political opinions, it must contend with the
unrighteousness of all alike. It must not be allured or guided by
the possibilities of national events. Its kingdom is not of this
world.

Akin to political aspects are denominational interests. These have
their allurements also, which, if indulged excessively, only tend
to part the garment of Christ. Forms and ceremonies well may serve
the interest of missions, but woe be the day when missions are
wrested to serve the interest of a form or polity.

Still another danger lies in the allurements of expedients. The
constant fluctuations in human affairs serve to unsettle the
faith and to relax the hold on the steady, enduring methods which
alone can give success. It is never to be forgotten that while
the surface may have the appearance of a refluent stream when
contending with the elements, yet God’s cause is imbedded in the
deep under-current and moves right on despite appearances. Great
essentials, great faith, wisdom from above, and persistent action
alone can overcome these hindrances, and advance our work as it
should be advanced.

What is demanded most by the hour is a revival of missionary zeal.
Let there be a fuller sense of our responsibility to Christ, and a
greater realization of our duty to those without. Let there be more
constant exercise of the power of prayer. Let the spirit come upon
us that counts all things secondary to the grand triumph of the
Redeemer’s kingdom. Let us be willing to lose all, to spend all,
and to suffer all to hasten that, and God will not withhold His
blessing, neither shall His coming be delayed.

Our readers will find in this number of the MISSIONARY a copy of
our present Constitution, and also one of that proposed by the
Committee appointed for that purpose at our last Annual Meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUPT. SALISBURY has in press a pamphlet containing the new
uniform course of study of the A. M. A. schools, with explanatory
comment and general suggestions to teachers. It will be ready for
distribution to the teachers some time in October, and will, it is
believed, be of great utility to them in the partial reorganization
of work proposed.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WARNER INSTITUTE, located at Jonesboro, East Tennessee, was
formed by the Friends, under the lead of Yardley Warner, for whom
it was named. The building, of brick, upon a fine crest in that
hill country, was formerly a ladies’ college for white people.
Friend Warner having conducted the institute for several years,
proposed to transfer it to this Association. This has been done,
and the school is yet to carry along the good work begun by the
founder. His many friends in this country and in England, who have
aided him in the enterprise, may rest assured that the institute
will be kept true to its original mission. Mrs. J. B. Nelson, who
had formerly been employed by Mr. Warner, has been made principal,
with the needed assistants.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE programme for a series of twenty-eight missionary meetings,
which our agent for New Hampshire and Vermont had planned to be
held in those States in August and September, under the auspices
of this Association was carried out, in due time, with great
completeness and success, the last of the course being held Sept.
28, afternoon and evening, in Manchester, N.H. The number of
sessions, counting those held in different places on the Sabbath,
was fifty-one. In almost every case the attendance, especially
at the second or evening session, was large and enthusiastic.
The addresses were varied, able and interesting. The brief but
touching story of Philip Page, who often told in broken English, in
a pleasing way, how and why he came to this country, what he had
found here, what he is doing, and how he hopes to go back some day
and tell his parents and others in Africa what Christ the Lord can
do for them, and the address of Rev. Joseph E. Smith, graduate of
Atlanta University, now pastor of the First Congregational Church
in Chattanooga, were always listened to with much interest. The
latter told of his bitter slave life, of his trials and struggles
and triumphs, in coming over from bondage into freedom, from the
slave pen and the auction block to the school, the college, the
pulpit and pastorate; addresses were also made by Prof. Thos. N.
Chase of Atlanta, Dr. Woodworth, of Boston, and by Rev. Mr. Grout,
who conducted the meetings.

The ready and hospitable welcome with which the speakers and
attendants from abroad were uniformly received by the churches
visited, the hearty and efficient co-operation of the several
pastors and other church officers, and the kindly notices of the
meetings given the public, from time to time, by the press of the
States and of the localities in which the conventions were held,
are reported as very cheering and indicative of a deep interest in
our great work.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE give in this number a cut of the church and parsonage at
Anniston, Ala., Rev. H. W. Conley, pastor. This is the town of the
Woodstock Iron Company, located ten years ago upon the bare red
fields. Now it has two iron furnaces, a cotton factory, an immense
machine shop, two railroads, a newspaper and a wonderful thrift. At
the beginning the company gave the church lot, aided on the church
and built the parsonage, helping also in the support of the pastor
and teacher. The church and school have been a blessing to the
families of the colored operatives of the place. This mission is a
beautiful illustration of the work this Association is doing for
the colored people South.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

John Guy Vassar, of Poughkeepsie, has made a gift of $25,000 more
to Vassar College.

The Sheffield Scientific School of Yale College has recently
received a bequest of $20,000.

The will of the late David Gallup, of Hartford, Conn., gives
$20,000 to aid the Woodward High School in Cincinnati.

Edward Clark, of New York, has given $50,000 to Williams College.

The widow of Senator Chandler, of Michigan, has given $1,000 to the
Chicago Woman’s Medical College.

The sum of $2,000,000 has been subscribed for the new Catholic
University in Milwaukee.

Kimball Union Academy, Meriden, N.H., receives $17,000 from the
estate of the late James Boyd, of Antrim.

Mr. William Blackwell has endowed eleven scholarships of $1000 in
the Baptist Louisburg University of Pennsylvania.

The University of Vermont is to have a new building for its medical
department to cost $40,000, the gift of John P. Howard. This will
make over $400,000 that Mr. Howard has given to the University and
the city within ten years.

Mr. De Pauw, of Indiana, has made a conditional pledge of a million
dollars for the endowment of Asbury University.

_It is hoped that the time is not far distant when endowment funds
will flow into the treasuries of our educational institutions South
as freely as they do into colleges in other parts of the country._

[Illustration: CHURCH AND PARSONAGE, ANNISTON, ALA.]

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—The Niger Mission reports 4,000 souls as under regular Christian
instruction.

—Three of Arabi Pasha’s children are in the United Presbyterian
Mission school at Cairo, Egypt.

—Mr. Stanley has discovered a lake on one of the tributaries of the
Congo which he has named Lake Leopold Second.

—The London Missionary Society has two mission ships that sail
between its stations in New Guinea, two in Africa, and one in the
South Seas.

—An English Methodist missionary laboring in Africa reports that
on going to the coast recently he was saluted by a trader with the
remark: “There must have been a lot of heathen joining your church
lately.” “Yes, it is so,” he was answered; “but how did you come to
know it?” “Oh, because there have been a lot of heathen people here
buying dresses, shawls, etc.”

—A new expedition, under German auspices, is being fitted out for
the exploration of the Upper Niger and the regions adjacent. It
starts out under competent leadership and promises good results in
knowledge of a portion of Africa as yet little known, but supposed
to be of large commercial importance.

—At the request of the Egyptian Mission, the last General Assembly
directed the Board of Publication to contribute $2,000 to aid in
the work of publishing a new edition of the Bible in Arabic in
large type. In compliance with this the Board of Publication on
the 5th of this month paid over the $2,000 to the American Bible
Society, who have the work now under way.

—According to a proposed treaty between Portugal and the Sultan
of Zanzibar, the two governments will engage that none of their
subjects buy or sell slaves in their respective territories. Any
one convicted of having violated the treaty will be delivered up
to the government, punished in consequence and his slaves set at
liberty.


THE CHINESE.

—The Hawaiian law prohibiting Chinamen from coming to the Islands
has been repealed, and 3,000 Chinese laborers have recently
contracted for their passage there.

—There is a Chinaman at work in Tahiti, in the South Sea Islands,
who is said to be a whole Bible Society in himself, expending
twenty dollars a month, out of a salary of twenty-five dollars, for
Bibles to distribute among his countrymen there.

[Illustration: CHINESE DRESSED FOR RAINY WEATHER.]

—M. Thiersant estimates the Mohammedan population of China to be
between twenty and twenty-one millions, and says he has arrived
at his figures from facts given by Mandarins, Romish priests, and
other prominent individuals. Mr. Blunt, in “The Future of Islam,”
allots fifteen million Moslems to China.

—According to Missionary Butler, of China, as Buddhism has no
heaven for women, the Chinese damsels labor with might and main to
lay up merits that they may prevail with the judges of the lower
world to let them be born again as men, so that they may have a
chance to get there.

—A Chinese Christian tailor thus described the relative merits of
Confucianism, Buddhism, and Christianity:—

“A man had fallen into a deep, dark pit, and lay in its miry
bottom, groaning and utterly unable to move. Confucius walked by,
approached the edge of the pit, and said, ‘Poor fellow, I am sorry
for you; why were you such a fool as to get in there? Let me give
you a piece of advice: If you ever get out, don’t get in again.’ ‘I
can’t get out,’ groaned the man. _That is Confucianism._

“A Buddhist priest next came by, and said, ‘Poor fellow, I am very
much pained to see you there. I think if you could scramble up
two-thirds of the way, or even half, I could reach you and lift
you up the rest.’ But the man in the pit was entirely helpless and
unable to rise. _That is Buddhism._

“Next the Saviour came by, and, hearing his cries, went to the
very brink of the pit, stretched down and laid hold of the poor
man, brought him up, and said, ‘Go, sin no more.’ _That is
Christianity._”—_Rev. Canon Stowell._


THE INDIANS.

—There are 296 church buildings among the Indians, including the
“five nations.”

—The religious bodies expended in 1881 the sum of $139,440 for
education and missions among the Indians.

—Out of the 260,000 Indians, there are 100,000 who have discarded
blankets and are wearing citizens’ dress, wholly or in part.

—The Ute Indians, who have steadily refused to send any of their
children to school, now have twenty-five in the training-school at
Albuquerque, New Mexico.

—The Indian reservations include 155,632,312 acres, of which
18,000,000 are tillable. Already the American Indians are
cultivating more than half a million acres of this land.

—The Indian Mission School at Fort Wrangle, Alaska, in which Mrs.
McFarland is teaching, has increased in numbers and interest the
past year, and many of the pupils have become Christians. One
of the oldest girls has been married to a Christian Indian, and
gone as a missionary to Upper Chilcat, where they both are doing
faithful service. Several more of the girls are prepared to engage
in mission work in their tribes as soon as the way opens.

—The Albuquerque _Morning Journal_ says: “The best thinkers all now
agree that education is the true solution of the Indian problem.
We have tried fighting them and feeding them, and both these plans
have signally failed, but education, in the few experiments we
have tried with it, has been thoroughly successful, and if we can
establish and maintain schools enough to educate the children that
are now growing up, our Indian difficulties will be at an end, and
the coming generation of Indians, instead of being savages, to be
hunted down by troops, or ‘corraled’ like wild beasts and fed at
the public expense, will be peaceful and useful citizens.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT.

PROF. ALBERT SALISBURY, SUPERINTENDENT OF EDUCATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


VACATIONING.

PROF. A. K. SPENCE, FISK UNIVERSITY.

“What did your students do during vacation?” Various things. But
with few exceptions they did not rest. Quite a number are young
and went to their homes in town and country—the girls to help
their mothers, the boys their fathers. Some hired out for house
and farm labor. One farms on his own account. One was head waiter
in a summer hotel in Tennessee. Two worked on a farm in Minnesota
and two, sons of a professor, on one in Ohio. Some ran on sleeping
cars in the North, and made up the beds you lay on. One worked in
the railroad exposition in Chicago. One kept store and studied law
in West Tennessee. One preached in Florence, Ala., with the usual
blessing of God on his labors. One was employed by the State of
Texas in holding institutes. Former students of ours were also
employed in the same way. But, as usual, the most of those advanced
enough to do so taught school. Not to mention those of low grade,
out of seventy-eight enrolled in the collegiate department last
year, fifty-seven taught school. The colored man seems by taste
and circumstances to be a school teacher. Occasionally a student
teaches who ought to rest. It is the thing to do. It is rather a
shame not to. The long-instructed desires to instruct. The young
fledgling wants to try its wings, the Demosthenes his oratory,
the Hercules his club. Long before vacation begins we teach
thinning classes, and lament many an empty seat the first Monday
in September. This is hard on scholarship, but necessary for the
purse, and good for their own manhood and the people whom they
teach.

Schools must be taught when they are held, and held when the
children can be spared from the farms. This varies with latitude
and the products raised. In the cotton region it is when the crop
is “laid by,” that is after the last hoeing and before the first
picking, and begins in April or May. In the wheat and grass regions
schools commence in June, July or even August. Those whom we lose
by early schools in the spring we get promptly in the fall, and the
reverse.

The most of the teachers who have returned report nothing
remarkable, no doubt the best kind of a report to have to make.
Honest, legitimate labor has never much to say for itself. Among
the things mentioned in addition to the paid labor of the work are
these: securing libraries, papers, Testaments for Sunday-school,
teaching infant class, teaching Bible class, leading singing,
superintending; and one did all this, organizing his entire school
into one class. He also rented an organ which he played. One or
more held prayer meetings. All had religious exercises in school.
A few gave temperance lectures. One had a temperance glee club.
Several gave musical entertainments, especially at close of school,
white and colored in attendance. One county in this State is
almost exclusively occupied by students from Fisk. They organized
themselves into an institute, meeting once a month for the
discussion of methods and the interests of education in general.
By invitation Prof. Bennett attended the last meeting, delivering
addresses and preaching on the following Sunday. He found the
colored people gathered _en masse_ and the interest up to fever
heat.

About the usual number of misfortunes has befallen our students
this year. One is shortsighted and wears spectacles; he is also
quite light colored. Both these damaged him. He was taken for a
Jew trying to pass himself off as a colored man. White and colored
alike looked upon him with suspicion. He succeeded in persuading
the colored people that he was one of them, but the whites had no
use for the “white nigger in spectacles.” By continued insult and
threats his nervous system was so worn upon that he fell sick and
left after teaching a month. Two young men teaching in a river
county in Mississippi had, briefly told, the following experience:
The boat could not land at the place sought, but they were put
ashore at midnight, three miles away. There were two houses at the
landing, one being unoccupied. In this they got permission to spend
the night. They lay on bags of cotton-seed. There being no means of
fastening doors, one of them put his money, two dollars and fifty
cents, in his shoe, under his foot, for safe-keeping. The next day
they walked through mud and rain to the town, and from there set
out in search of schools.

To secure a school is frequently a thing of no small difficulty.
The young men or women must make a journey of miles through
blind ways on foot or with such conveyance as can be found. The
neighborhood being reached, the leading colored people must
be approached as the first step. The community is Baptist or
Methodist, and the school will be held in the church. “What are
you?” “I am a Congregationalist.” “What is that?” If denominational
difficulties are overcome, the next thing to do is to meet the
white trustees. They may be in favor of _home talent_. These
foreign students carry money out of the country. They look
independent and may teach things not in the book. But here is
Sam. He can read. He owes ’Squire So-and-so. If he gets the
school he will pay him. We favor Sam. If, however, Sam cannot by
every contrivance pass the examination, the Fisk student appears
before the County Superintendent. But here a new difficulty. The
Superintendent holds an institute to prepare persons to pass his
own examination, charging them five dollars apiece. Those who
attend are quite sure to pass. It is wise for the Fisk student to
be at that institute, pay his fee and pass, for when that institute
is over the time for getting a school in that county is up. This
state of things does not exist in all places, let us hope not in
many, but it does in some. It is quite a common rule never to
give a first-class certificate, no matter what the scholarship,
to a colored student, as in most States it increases his pay, and
perhaps it would not seem fit for a colored boy or girl to get a
better certificate than some white young man or woman. There are
exceptions to this rule. In one examination in which there were
forty candidates, two got first-class certificates. These two were
from Fisk.

       *       *       *       *       *


A WANT—READING ROOMS.

PROF. ALBERT SALISBURY.

It is hard to realize, even when we make the conscious effort,
how much of the general culture, intelligence, and power of the
American people is due to the habit of reading. That there is
not a more marked and easily discernible difference between the
intelligence and practical efficiency of the college-bred man and
of the man of less training is largely due to the fact that the
one reads as widely and continually as the other. Even superficial
and omnivorous reading is an efficient source of intelligence and
power. So universal is this habit of reading among the native-born
people of the Northern States, that it is hard for them to conceive
of its absence. It costs us an effort to imagine the mental status
of a person who cannot or does not read. Yet there are millions
of people in the South who cannot read and millions more who do
not. It is one thing to teach a child how to read; it is quite
another thing to make him _love_ to read, to give him the _habit_
of reading. And the first has comparatively little value without
the other. It is of little moment that a million children have been
taught the art of reading if they do not practice it freely.

Now the fact is that of the hundreds of thousands who have been
in the freedmen’s schools but a very small part have ever formed
the reading habit. And, as one consequence, even college graduates
of the colored race have far less general intelligence and
intellectual efficiency than white people of much more limited
education.

There is nothing singular or unaccountable about this. It is the
natural consequence of the circumstances existing. The parents of
these young people were slaves, to whom reading was a forbidden
art. In their houses, highly as the ability to read may be prized,
and earnestly as it may be sought for their children, there are as
yet no books, no magazines, no newspapers even. If, indeed, there
be any printed thing there, it is almost without exception of the
most trashy, crude, and worthless, if not vile and corrupting,
sort, from both the literary and the moral point of view. The dime
novel, the “Fireside Companion,” the sloshy, ungrammatical local
newspaper are, at the best, all that one may hope to find. In
cultured homes, children acquire the habit of reading by contagion.
It is fairly _bred_ into them. But in the homes of the freedmen
there is no contagious example, and there can be none. There is for
the colored youth no inheritance of culture in any way. Children
in Northern homes take in more of culture through the skin, by
unconscious absorption, in the first ten years of life than the
freedmen’s children can ever acquire except by long years of
schooling.

From the consideration of these facts, two conclusions
follow—first, that for the intellectual uplifting of the colored
race it is absolutely essential that the reading habit be
established in some way; and, second, that it should be the active
endeavor of all the missionary schools to devise and employ the
best agencies for stimulating and establishing this habit.

Now comes the practical question, What are the instrumentalities
by which we can implant and cultivate the love of profitable and
elevating reading?

Of course, something may be done in the regular course of
instruction. Reading in school may be so taught as to give real
culture of taste and appreciation. The sips of good literature
found in the reading-books may be so used as to create a desire to
drink freely at the fountain-head; though it is to be confessed
that many teachers fail lamentably in this direction. The student
of history or geography may and should be pushed out of his
text-book into the wide field from which text-books are gleaned.
Yet all this has much of the flavor of the daily task about it.
Can anything be done to make the act of reading more spontaneous,
to make it seem more like an indulgence and a recreation than an
exaction and a duty?

The answer need not be a negative. It is to be found in
reading-rooms, wisely placed and planned. And much stress is to be
laid on these qualifications.

The first requisite for a reading-room is accessibility. It must be
placed where it can be got at easily and continually. A locked-up
library, open only once or twice a week at a stated hour, with the
issue of books held under formal regulations is utterly futile as
a means of creating the reading habit; it is useful only for those
who have the habit already formed. A reading-room must not only be
conveniently placed where the pupils can not escape it, as it were,
but it must also be open at all times; so that in all the moments
of leisure, whether in the hours set apart for labor or those for
recreation, there may be the freest access, that even “he that
runs” may read a little. It, therefore, becomes almost a necessity
in a boarding-school that there be two reading-rooms, one for each
sex.

The second requirement for success is that the reading matter
be well chosen, selected with regard to the ends in view. It is
absurd to suppose that reading matter so stale, dull or obstruse
as to have no longer any value among a reading people should
be worth sending to a people who have not yet learned to read.
Musty libraries of defunct ministers are even more useless in a
freedmen’s school than at the North. Discarded Sunday-school books
are little better; for in any library the readable books are worn
to pieces before the rest are given away. Old files of religious
or other newspapers have their uses; but to make a reading-room
tempting is not one of them.

The matter in a reading-room should be fresh, interesting, and
adapted to the mental condition of those for whom it is provided;
otherwise it cannot be either profitable or inspiring. The
newspapers must contain _current_ news. The magazines must be
adapted to the pupil’s stage of development, which is, so far
as reading is concerned, usually the juvenile stage. Freedmen’s
children are not yet ready, to any considerable extent, for
philosophy or high art.

The books—for there should be books as well as papers in our
reading-rooms—should be fresh, well printed, and, above all,
illustrated. Good pictures, such as are found in the recent
publications of the Harpers and Scribner, illuminate the words
of the book for these young people as nothing else can. And a
book closely printed, on poor paper, without illustration, is a
tax on any reader but the confirmed book-worm. The books should
relate, largely, to the world in its external aspects and to human
achievement—books of travel and adventure, of history in its
romantic phases, the great deeds of great men, whether knights of
war or labor.

To be specific, such books as Knox’s Boy Traveler series, Coffin’s
Histories, Butterworth’s Zizzag Journeys, Swiss Family Robinson,
and even the productions of Jules Verne, placed within the easy and
constant reach of our pupils, would be the most effective means
imaginable for securing the valuable result desired.

Were they well printed and illustrated, I would add to the above
list the old-time “Rollo Books.” Indeed, the list given is but a
fragment of that which might now be made up. Among the periodicals,
_Wide Awake_, _St. Nicholas_, and _Harper’s Young People_ should
have a prominent place alongside the _Century_ and _Harper’s
Weekly_ and _Monthly_.

I have not time to dwell upon the moral results, even more
important than the intellectual ones, sure to come from the
employment of the means herein imperfectly indicated; but I am
sure that reading-rooms such as I have in mind can be made a most
valuable auxiliary of our work in its best and highest purposes.

If any persons chancing to read this, desire fuller information
with a view to co-operation in a good work, I shall be happy to
receive communications from them at any time.

       *       *       *       *       *


A GENEROUS WORD FROM THE SOUTH.

FROM THE MEMPHIS APPEAL.

The Memphis _Appeal_, in an editorial column upon the Education
of the Negro, taking as a text the recent Episcopal Congress of
colored men in this city and the Louisville Convention, says to
certain representative men:

“We recommend them to get the annual reports of the American
Missionary Society, of the Southern and Northern Methodist
Churches, and of the African Methodist and Baptist Churches.
From these they will find that more than $20,000,000 have been
expended by these religious organizations since 1864 in building
and maintaining handsome school-houses in which the Negro has been
trained and educated and fitted for the noble task and important
duty of training and educating others. They will find, too, from
these reports that in all these years white men and women of
learning and culture have labored, often in the face of prejudice
and within earshot of contumely and hate. What these missionaries
have done, the world at large has made little note of, but the days
are not far distant when everywhere, through the South at least,
it will be acknowledged as the greatest of all the great works
accomplished in the United States since 1865. From the Potomac
almost to the Rio Grande the academies and colleges of the American
Missionary Society are to be found at nearly all the large centers
of population, and they are flourishing because their work is a
practical work and their purpose the plain one of widening and
deepening the stream of learning at which the once slaves of the
South may drink freely and at will. These institutions are the
results of a generous benevolence, and have been maintained by
a self-denying zeal worthy of the glorious Luther, whose birth
a grateful world is everywhere celebrating with gladness. We
recommend them to read the reports of the Rev. Atticus G. Haygood,
of Oxford, Ga., who, since he wrote the _Brother in Black_, has
launched into the work of furthering the education of the Negro
with the zeal of a missionary, and the spirit of a soldier in
a noble cause. Dr. Haygood, not long ago, made a tour of the
South in the interest of the fund for which he is the dispensing
agent, and the result is a more fervent devotion to the good work
and more fervid and appealing speeches in its behalf. A gallant
ex-Confederate, a Southerner by birth and breeding, and the son
of a slaveholder, brought up, too, in a wealthy planting section
of Georgia, he entered upon his, at first, self-appointed task as
a mere private, a volunteer in the ranks where he found so many
noble workers. But his knowledge of the Negro, of his capacity, and
his needs, and the best methods of reaching practical educational
results soon marked him for the high position he now occupies
as the trusted and confidential agent of a fund bequeathed by a
benevolent Northern man, whose desire for the advancement and
betterment of the Negro Dr. Haygood is furthering by helping
all the schools at the South that have these for their objects.
Already, in the first year of the existence of the fund, this good,
strong man finds encouraging results following upon what he has
expended of it, and he pleads on every possible occasion with voice
and pen for the extension of the practical system of education
so long pursued by the American Missionary Association, and in
which he sees the best possibilities of the dark race. Dr. Haygood
speaks plainly, as well as eloquently. He calls a spade a spade.
He does not spare any who set themselves in his way or in the way
of the work he has so much at heart. He knows that education makes
every man better, stronger and happier than he could be without
it and he contends for its dissemination by compulsion if other
means fail of making it general, of bringing it into every man’s
house as essential to the maintenance of the peace that passes all
understanding. It is in the nature of things that such a man should
encounter opposition; that he should even be reviled, abused and
misrepresented, but he has only to take counsel of those who have
occupied the field he is now in during the past twenty years to
find a sweet solace and a consolation for it all. He can read in
their lives the opening chapters of his own career in the field
of Negro education, but he can also read of a generous if tardy
recognition of their labors by the best educated men and women of
the South, who willingly acknowledge their indebtedness to them for
the patient, earnest, laborious work by which in so short a time
nearly forty per cent. of the Negro population has been taught to
read and write, and so many thousands have been trained and fitted
after the most approved technical methods to teach in Negro public
schools and thus perpetuate the blessings they rejoice in the
possession of.”

       *       *       *       *       *

AN APOSTOLIC SALUTATION.—At Birmingham, Ala., a city of only
a decade, in its iron and coal interest worthy of its English
namesake, Field Superintendent Roy found Congregational
representatives of half a dozen of our other schools and
churches, who had been drawn to that busy metropolis, as so many
acquaintances of the Apostle Paul in Asia Minor had been drawn
to Rome to be addressed by name in the salutatory chapter of his
Epistle to the Romans before he had himself ever been to that city.
Canon Farrar argues that that chapter must belong to some other
Epistle, on account of the difficulty of the Apostle’s knowing so
many people at Rome. If the Canon of Westminster had only been a
Superintendent of Missions he would have had no such trouble. Dr.
Roy could have given the apostolic salutation to the Saints of this
new church.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTICES ON THE OPENING OF SCHOOLS.

SELECTED FROM CORRESPONDENCE.

Storrs School, Atlanta.—We have enrolled three hundred and seventy
pupils and have been obliged to refuse admittance to fifty on
account of room. We are all wishing for more room and an increase
in our teaching force so that we may receive all that apply. I have
thought for several years that the necessity of the continuance of
Storrs School would cease as the public schools for colored people
increased in number, but I am becoming satisfied that it is a
permanence. The increase in population of this fast growing city,
and the desire of the people for a thorough education keep all the
schools of any value full.

Talladega College.—So far as I can now judge we are to have all the
students we can find room for, and I think more will pay at least a
part of their expenses than heretofore.

Charleston, Avery Institute.—Our opening was admirable in order,
large in numbers, and blessed by the presence of parents and
patrons who gave me a most cordial welcome. There was every
evidence of sincerity about it, and I am delighted with my
induction and with the two days. The institution is one of the
grandest in design, scope, and progress, and is sufficient to
excite my highest pride.

Tougaloo University.—An unusually large number of independent
applications have been sent in, so that we are likely to have an
overflow of students. These will need to be provided for. You may,
therefore, hear from us again, asking for provisions of shelter to
meet the demand. We never had so many apply before the opening of
school.

Nashville, Tenn.—Fisk University.—We are now able to speak of our
opening as a very favorable one. The number of new students is
larger than usual and of a more advanced class, and the spirit was
never better.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

—Rev. Evarts Kent, of Atlanta, Ga., took his vacation in Vermont
visiting his father, Rev. Cephas H. Kent, of New Haven, and
preaching a historical sermon at Benson. He met a warm welcome upon
his return to his field.

—The brothers, Rev. A. W. and Rev. C. B. Curtis, of Marion and
Selma, Ala., having had their vacation in the Northwest, are back
again upon their chosen spheres of labor.

—The health of President E. A. Ware’s wife having been greatly
threatened, upon medical advice he spent the summer with her in the
Adirondacks and is much encouraged by the improvement attained. He
is now back at his post, as are also Professors T. N. Chase and C.
W. Francis.

—Rev. Dr. Horace Bumstead and wife, of the Atlanta University, have
been afflicted in the death of their youngest child, a son, which
occurred on Lookout Mountain, whither they had fled for relief in
the pure air of that locality.

—Prof. R. D. Hitchcock, of the Straight University, having been
called to the presidency of the Southern University, New Orleans,
has declined the same and remains at his post.

—Prof. Albert Salisbury, Superintendent of Education, having
taken as a wife Miss Hosford, a teacher in the Whitewater Normal,
Wisconsin, has installed his family in their Atlanta home, and he
is now going his Southern rounds.

—The “Cassedy Hall” has been built this summer at Talladega for the
use of the primary department and named for Mr. J. H. Cassedy, of
this State, who gave the $5,000 needed for its erection.

—The “Whitin Hall,” at New Orleans, has been built this summer as
a boy’s dormitory and named for the late Deacon J. C. Whitin, of
Whitinsville, Mass., whose estate paid in $10,000, which, for the
erection, was put with $5,000 given by Deacon Seymour Straight, for
whom the university was named.

—Prof. J. A. Nichols, lately Superintendent of Schools at Yonkers,
N.Y., has been made Principal of the Avery Institute at Charleston,
S.C., in the place of Prof. A. W. Farnham, who resigned.

—Rev. Milton E. Churchill, a graduate of Knox College and of the
New Haven Divinity School, a son of Prof. Geo. Churchill, of
Galesburg, Ill., has been made Principal of the Emerson Institute,
at Mobile, Ala.

—The Le Moyne Institute, at Memphis, Tenn., has been enlarged at
a cost of $2,000, one-half of which, upon the solicitation of the
Principal, A. J. Steele, was furnished by white citizens of that
place.

—At Macon, Ga., to accommodate the library, which Rev. S. E.
Lathrop has been gathering, a Library Building has been erected,
with a basement for an industrial department. For this project,
citizens of Macon, both white and colored, contributed liberally.

—Rev. B. A. Imes, pastor at Memphis, Tenn., having received an
appointment in the Alcorn University, Mississippi, with a tempting
salary, has decided to remain with his chosen people. He is popular
in that city, and the teachers of the Le Moyne Institute seem to be
as fond of their preacher as the parishioners who make up the body
of his church.

—At Little Rock, Arkansas, a school has been opened this fall in
the Congregational Church of Rev. Y. B. Sims, under Miss Rose M.
Kinney as Principal, a lady of large experience in our work. This
school is the precursor of the Edward Smith College, which is to
go along in that city. Miss M. E. Keyes is associated with her as
missionary.

—The new church at Mobile, Ala., was dedicated on the last Sabbath
of September, Pastor Crawford and Revs. J. C. Fields and F. G.
Ragland participating.

—Rev. O. D. Crawford, who has this summer had the supervision of
the erection of the new church at Mobile and of the Whitin Hall
at New Orleans, has resigned his pastorate at Mobile because of
the incompatibility of that climate with the health of his family.
He will be greatly missed upon the field. He will return to some
pastoral charge at the North.

—Theological students, who have been supplying churches during the
vacation, have now returned to their studies—Rev. S. N. Brown, from
Florence, Ala., where he participated in a revival, to the Fisk
University; Rev. F. G. Ragland, from Mobile, to Talladega; Rev. J.
R. McLean, from Savannah, to Talladega.

—The A. M. A. has appointed Rev. J. C. Fields to labor for one
year as an evangelist among the churches at the South. For the
last year and a half he has labored in this capacity, much to the
satisfaction of the churches. He will supply the church at Mobile
for a time.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


A VISIT TO FORT SULLY INDIAN MISSION.

BY REV. C. O. BROWN.

We had anticipated it with keenest interest, and Providence favored
us. A delightful morning of the first week in August smiled on
our programme, when our party of four persons was ready for the
carriage ride from Pierre to the mission,—Rev. S. Norton, pastor
of the Congregational Church of Pierre; Mr. J. Kimball, of Huron,
Dakota, missionary of the American Sunday-school Union; Timothy
Hudson, Esq.; and the writer, of Kalamazoo, Mich.

The scenery for the first six miles, from the heights which border
the Missouri River, was most charming. At our left, and beneath us,
was the river and its narrow strip of foliage and bottom lands,
having here and there a picturesque dotting of Indian tents; beyond
that, westward turned the grass-covered hills; to our right were
the boundless prairies, beautifully variegated with cultivated
squares of green and golden grain and settlers’ homes.

[Illustration: MISSION HOME, FORT SULLY.]

An abrupt descent from such an outlook brought us to the valley
beneath, through which the remaining eight miles of our ride
lay. We had only fairly entered the valley when we began to see
evidences of the faithful mission work which has here been done.
For several miles along the river we were constantly passing the
farms of mission Indians, where we saw established homes, quite as
good as those of their white neighbors. We saw full-blooded Indians
in civilized dress, riding their mowing-machines, raking their hay,
and stacking their grain.

Rev. Thomas Riggs was away from home at the bedside of his
venerable father in Beloit, but we were most kindly received by the
lady missionaries in charge, Misses Collins and Irvine. The mission
home into which we were ushered, is a long, tastefully-built
log-house, standing sidewise to the road, having in front two
bay windows, with porch between, and in the rear a large lean-to
attachment for kitchen and laundry. The yard is beautiful with
flowers and plants, and hallowed by a little inner enclosure which
holds the sacred dust of Mrs. Riggs. (Shown in the picture just to
the left of the home.) The large mission garden would be famous in
any neighborhood. It is a sermon in vegetables and small fruits,
well cultivated and highly productive. Just east of the home is
the little chapel, a building capable of seating from 150 to 200
persons, having ceiled walls, and seated with chairs; having a neat
pulpit and a good cabinet organ.

The interior of the home is most inviting. The spacious
sitting-room has little of luxury; everything, however, is most
cheery. The walls are ceiled and adorned with pictures. The bay
window is beautiful with plants and vines and birds. A Steinway
piano is at one end of the room, statuettes here and there, and
books everywhere. During the twenty-four hours of our stay, our
party wandered at liberty over the grounds, visited the chapel,
were received by the Indians in their homes, and in the large room
just described were several times entertained by their singing
while their teachers led on the piano. No honest enemy of Indian
missions could see and hear what we saw and heard, without a change
of heart. Time and again we were melted to tears.

Our visit was entirely unexpected, so nothing could be “gotten up”
for our benefit. We were the better pleased that it should be so.
Everything was impromptu and natural.

The climax came unexpectedly just as we were about to go the next
morning. While two of the brethren were hitching the horses a
party of Indian women and two little boys, who with their baskets
were about to pass the door, were called in by Miss Collins.
They hesitated, and through their teacher apologized for their
appearance, explaining that they had just started on a berrying
trip. One of the men, who had come on some errand, was also invited
in. Then Miss Irvine led on the piano and they all sang from open
hymn books, one after another of the sweet gospel hymns which we
could recognize only by the tunes. As they sang

    “Jesus loves me, this I know,
    For the Bible tells me so,”

and

    “Oh, happy day that fixed my choice
        On Thee, my Saviour and my God;
    Well may this glowing heart rejoice
        And tell its raptures all abroad,”

we could not refrain from tears. Our brethren, who had been
attending the horses, heard the music and came in. One glance
unsealed the fountain, and they too wept for joy. Then we all
knelt in prayer. There were prayers in English and prayers in
Dakota language, freely intermingled, and a pervading sense that
the good Father understood it all. When we arose to our feet the
Indians sang the _Gloria_, and Spotted Bear, by invitation, closed
the meeting with a prayer which touched every heart, although we
could not understand a word of it. The language of the heart is
everywhere the same. And so with hearty hand-shakings and moist
eyes this long-to-be-remembered meeting broke up. We came away
feeling that for many a day we had not enjoyed such a refreshing,
and saying one to another, “Surely God hath made of one blood all
nations of men.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPORT OF SUPERINTENDENT.

REV. W. C. POND.

COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS YEAR.—The work of the previous year
(1881 to 1882) was by far the largest we had ever done. The same
superlative applies to the year just closed. Our statistical table
for that year contained the names of fifteen schools, with a total
enrollment for the year of 2,567 pupils. This table shows nineteen
schools with an aggregate enrollment of 2,823. The total number of
months during which schools were sustained was in that year 153; in
this year, 187. Our teachers during that year numbered 31; eleven
being Chinese; this year, 41; fourteen being Chinese. The aggregate
number of months of service by our teachers was then 356; the past
year, 423. The aggregate average attendance was in that year 401;
in this, 438. We reported last year 156 as professing to have
ceased from idol worship, and 106 as giving evidence of conversion;
this year we report 175 and 121. But these numbers represent only
those who were in attendance during August, or during the last
month of each school—not by any means the total number of whom we
cherish the hope that they are believers. I am obliged to send
this statement before all the returns upon which it should be
based have come to hand, but I shall be disappointed if we do not
find that more than forty have professed conversion during the
past year, making the total number who have seemed to us to turn
to Christ from the commencement of our work exceed 400. These are
scattered now very widely over the United States and in China. We
hear of many of them as doing good work for the Master and for
the salvation of their countrymen; and those of whom we can hear
nothing, we commit in faith to the Great Shepherd’s tender care.

THE FINANCES.—The expense of this work for the past year has been
as follows: For salaries, $8,697.20; for rent of mission houses,
$2,409; for incidental expenses, including fuel, lights, traveling
expenses of Superintendent and helpers, fitting up and furnishing
new mission houses, printing Annual Reports, etc., etc., $791.85.
Total, $11,898.05. The resources have been: Appropriation by parent
society, $7,000; Receipts to treasury and auxiliary, viz.: From its
own auxiliary local missions, $735.05; from churches, $1,003.60;
from donations by individuals and firms, $2,613, and from Eastern
friends, $512. Total, $4,863. Total resources, $11,863. It should
be added that this statement is necessarily made before the account
of the auxiliary (the California Chinese Mission) is closed, and
that we have hope of some further contributions, sufficient to set
the balance on the right side. The amount raised by the auxiliary
last year was $3,582.30. The increase has been nearly 37 per cent.
The most gratifying elements in this increase are in the offerings
of the churches and of our Chinese brethren. The latter cannot
now be stated exactly, but it is very considerable. The former is
from $532.85 in ’81-’82 to $1,003.60 in ’82-’83; and the number of
churches contributing has doubled rising from 15 to 30.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


As was indicated in the August MISSIONARY, ladies from the
different benevolent societies for home work are holding a series
of meetings in Michigan. The Bureau of Woman’s Work is represented
by Miss Anna M. Cahill, who has been connected for several years
with Fisk University.

       *       *       *       *       *


HELP AT PUBLIC MEETINGS.

The Bureau of Woman’s Work is prepared to present the claims
of this Association in its line before missionary meetings,
conferences, Sabbath-schools, monthly concerts and other religious
gatherings, either through its Secretary or some one who has had
large experience on the Southern field. Application should be made
to Miss D. E. Emerson, 56 Reade street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTRIBUTION FROM A LADY MISSIONARY.

We do enjoy our work, and it was never more encouraging than now,
and yet sometimes it grows almost unbearable, to be so utterly
alone. The dear Lord sent a bit of a thought to cheer me to-day,
and I sat down and wrote it out, thinking it might comfort other
lonely workers in these dark corners.


THE LORD’S GARDEN.

(LOVINGLY INSCRIBED TO THE A. M. A. WORKERS IN THE SOUTH.)

    A few days’ work In His garden,
      The dear Lord gave me to do;
    And I went to my task so gladly,
      I thought ’twould be something new—

    Some dainty task ’mong the flowers,
      That would show my skill and taste.
    Alas! I sat down in sorrow,
      To weep at the woeful waste.

    For He sent me to a corner.
      Where never a flower could bloom;
    A tangled thicket of tall, rank weeds,
      As damp and dark as a tomb.

    But I said, “The dear Lord sent me.”
      So in tears the task begun,
    Clearing the weeds and rubbish away,
      From morning till set of sun.

    Far away I heard the voices
      Of fellow-servants so gay.
    As they worked in bands together,
      While I wrought alone all day,

    Tearing my hands with the thistles,
      With heart so heavy and sad,
    And never a flower to cheer me,
      Or a song to make me glad.

    But slowly the task grew lighter,
      As I cleared the rubbish away,
    And the soft brown earth lay open
      To the light and warmth of day.

    The Master came down at nightfall,
      And gave me a smile so sweet,
    I knew He was pleased with the service,
      Though so rough and incomplete.

    For He said, “Dear heart, be patient!
      I bring you some seeds to sow
    In the soft soil, and you may watch
      To see that they thrive and grow.”

    So my heart grew light and gladsome,
      For the corner dark and wild.
    Where I’d wrought in tears and sadness,
      In growing loveliness smiled.

    I watched and tended my corner,
      I gave it most faithful care,
    Pruning, training the tender plants
      Till they bloomed with fragrance rare.

    The Master came to His garden
      Again, at set of the sun,
    And I ran with joy to meet Him,
      For He said, “Dear child, well done!

    “For this dark, benighted corner
      Was a grievous sight to see.
    What you have wrought in toil and pain
      Was a blessed work for me.”

    Forgotten was all the sorrow,
      Forgotten the lonely hours,
    As I stood beside the Master
      Who smiled upon the flowers.

Sept. 25th, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE STORY THAT SUBDUED HIM.

BY MRS. HARRIET A. CHEEVER.

A man of towering form, straight as an arrow, with copper-colored
skin, stood before a bit of looking-glass in a small wooden
dwelling. The clearing about the little habitation indicated
perseverance and thrift on the part of the owner. It had taken more
than that—hard labor and an almost endless amount of patience had
been required to bring this little portion of a “reservation” into
its present condition.

The tawny man regarding himself in the bit of mirror was
unmistakably a savage, and savage enough his regular features
were as he addressed himself at that moment. He was decently
and comfortably clothed, in garments coarse, but clean and not
ill-fitting. But with an angry, scowling face, and quick, fierce
movements, the young giant was throwing off his garments, growling
in thick, guttural tones, “I kill, I shoot, I burn! Pale face
shan’t push Indian any more; I take th’ warpath again, let pale
face beware—him serpent!”

Ten minutes later, and he would never have passed for the same man
first seen. His face was daubed with streaks of paint, making it
hideous indeed. The broad wampum belt contained both bowie knife
and pistol, while a coarse jacket and leggings of wolf-skin made
the tall figure appear animal-like in its ungainly trappings.

But what wonder the slumbering savage nature was asserting itself!
For two long years, Trapper Dan—he liked the name the white men
had given him, successful hunter that he was—yes, for two years,
Trapper Dan had worked and slaved, encouraged by really kind
leaders, and with simple faith in the white man’s promises, he
believed the plot of land he was cultivating so untiringly, and the
rude but enduring little building would be his to keep forever. He
was a bright man naturally, and grasped eagerly the offers made by
the superior class of beings known to him as the pale faces.

But now, when things were working never so easily and prosperously,
the reservation was to be broken up, or at least so meanly
encroached upon, that Trapper Dan’s little mite of an estate was
included in the reservation to be reserved no longer.

What wonder, we repeat, that the barbarous instincts of the man
awoke in vengeful fury toward the unscrupulous destroyers of his
peace and his home? For, after all, the holy instincts clustering
about the idea of a home are easily understood and fostered even by
the savage when once he can grasp its blessed meaning.

In hateful guise and with deadly weapons, the hunted trapper
stole, forth under cover of the darkness, his poor heart thirsting
for revenge. He realized vaguely that the Great Spirit would be
displeased at his anger, but he stifled all that as he vaulted
along toward the building where a great meeting was to be held.

A slight young man just entering on a missionary career had
resolved that on this, his first night of addressing the Indians,
he would tell them in the very plainest language possible the
simple story of Jesus and His cross. Doubtless they had heard it
many times before, but no matter, it should be told to-night mainly
in words of one syllable, so that even the most untaught could
understand its import.

Cowering close by one of the openings answering for windows was the
unseen figure of Trapper Dan, his dark face and darker designs
alike in hiding until the time for action should come. Once the
people were engrossed in the speaker, he would shoot into the
building and bring down more than one pale face on the platform,
then he would hide again, only to pillage and burn later on in the
night.

He did not wish to listen or hear anything that might be said by
a despicable pale face, but when the young missionary, with heart
on fire for very love of his theme, told of the innocent little
baby, born in the far-off East, Dan became unconsciously interested
in _that baby_. Then, in words, every one of which his hearers
understood, the speaker told of the eager, intelligent boy, who
lingered in the temple to ask questions of the wise old doctors.

Then the child became a man and did wondrous things, and for the
needy, the poor, the blind, the sick, the sinning! In most touching
accents he went on and told of the cruel return this dear child,
this bright boy, this loving, helpful man received at the hands
of those he had only helped and blessed. He came at last to the
piteous scenes at the cross, and when he cried out: “And it was all
for you, poor Indian, for you and me—for us all,” Trapper Dan was
surprised to find the tears raining over his painted cheeks, and
the anger and hatred was all gone from his poor heart. He lingered
to hear the young preacher tell of the forgiveness of the Saviour
towards his cruel enemies, then he turned away; and it was not a
savage any longer, but a softened, forgiving man, who went back to
the crude little home on the borders of the great solemn forest.
He wanted now so much to forgive those who were wronging him, that
early the next morning the land agent was surprised to see Trapper
Dan walk into his office, and holding out a friendly hand, say
bluntly: “I forgive all for the dear Jesus’ sake—he die for poor
Indian. I give up home, give up land—um sorry, but I no harm pale
face.”

Later the same day the missionary found Trapper Dan, and was amazed
at the man’s gentle, forgiving spirit. A ferocious look had stolen
for a moment into his face when telling of his labor and his
wrongs, but it died out at the name of Jesus.

It transpired that the little home was not disturbed after all, and
the missionary not long after remarked feelingly to the agent:

“Only give him a fair chance, only treat him like a man and a
brother, treat him fairly and squarely, teach him Christ so he will
know him for a Saviour, and I will answer for the Indian. He may
appear the savage until taught better things, but he has the heart
of a human being after all.”

       *       *       *       *       *


BRING IN THE TITHES. MAL. 3: 10.

BY NOEL HALL.

    Bring in the tithes, bring in the tithes,
      The hovering blessing, haste to claim;
    Or gold, or incense, corn, or wine,
      Bring to the honor of His name—
    The Giving One, whose law demands
    Thank-loans, returned into his hands.

    Bring in the tithes, while faith is warm,
      And love rehearses all his grace;
    While zeal inspired, would fain go forth,
      And bear his fame from place to place:
    Your work, his treasury to fill—
    The Lord’s, to bless you as he will.

    Let love essay its best to bring
      Unto the altar of the Lord
    Itself, its gems, its precious things,
      And, bringing, find a sweet reward.
    Behold, your offerings freely given,
    Before you know, ’tis almost heaven!

    The word stands fast. “Bring in the tithes,
      Fill up my house, with sacred store,
    And prove me now: see my full hand,
      From heaven’s open windows pour
    A blessing that is past compare—
    Reward of giving blent with prayer.”

    A glad and willing sacrifice
      This day, this hour, make haste to bring;
    Lo, even while you come—surprise!
      Because you’ve brought unto the King
    Your gifts elect, he all restores,
    Himself, his riches, all are yours.

                                          —AMERICAN MESSENGER.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR SEPTEMBER, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $575.21.

    Castine. Rev. A. E. Ives                                  $5.00
    East Madison. Mrs. Eliza Bicknell                          4.00
    Freeport. Daniel Lane                                      5.00
    Machias. Center St. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 6.16;
      “Lady Member Center St. Ch.,” 5                         11.16
    Milltown. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Furniture _for
      Guest Room, Talladega C._
    Oldtown. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    South Berwick. Mrs. Ephraim Hodgson’s S. S.
      Class, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                  12.00
    South Bridgton. F. W. Sanborn                             15.00
    South Paris. Cong. Ch.                                     6.30
    West Farmington. Box of Books by Mrs. Hannah
      F. Packard, _for Chattanooga, Tenn._
    Wilton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.75
    Woodford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               6.00
                                                          ---------
                                                             $75.21

    LEGACY.

    Augusta. Estate of John Dorr, by J. W. Chase, Ex.        500.00
                                                          ---------
                                                            $575.21


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $205.90.

    Brentwood. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              5.00
    Chester. Mrs. Mary E. Hidden                              10.00
    Exeter. Second Cong. Ch., “A Friend.”                      2.00
    Exeter. Mrs. W. Odlin, _for Land and Building,
      Austin, Texas_                                           1.00
    Fitzwilliam. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            1.00
    Harrisville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           11.00
    Hebron. Rev. J. B. Cook and Wife                           5.00
    Henniker. Mrs. M. L. C. Whiting                            5.00
    Keene. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., _for S. S. Work_           25.00
    Keene. Second Cong. Ch., Mrs. J. A. Grimes                 5.00
    Keene. “Children’s Miss’y Garden,” Second
      Cong. Ch., _for a Little Girl in Bird’s
      Nest, Fort Berthold, Dak._                              10.00
    Littleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             13.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  18.75
    Marlborough. “A Friend”                                    0.50
    Merrimack. First Cong. Ch.                                16.80
    Milton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.00
    Nelson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                10.60
    Peterborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                    5.00
    Salem. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 5; Mrs. Gilman D.
      Kelley, 1                                                6.00
    Swanzey. Mrs. R. Williams                                  2.00
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             12.00
    Wilton. Second Cong Ch. and Soc.                          31.25
    Wilton. “Busy Bees,” _for Woman’s Work_                    5.00


  VERMONT, $738.00.

    Burlington. Third Cong. Ch.                               53.40
    Burlington. Winooski Av. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           76.00
    Cambridge. Mr. and Mrs. Madison Safford                   38.52
    Cambridge. B. R. Holmes, 5; Rev. E. Wheelock,
      5; O. W. Reynolds, 5; S. M. Safford, 5; “A
      Friend” (Morrisville), 5; H. Wires, 3; Mrs.
      M. Blaisdell, 3; —— Morris, 4; Others, 8                43.00
    Charlotte. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             40.00
    Cornwall. Mrs. Mary W. Mead                                3.00
    Derby. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  7.00
    Dorset. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                          8.00
    Dummerston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.50
    Ferrisburg. Cong. Ch., “Individual.”                       4.00
    Manchester. Rev. Albert C. Reed, Box of Books,
      Val. $50, _for Chattanooga, Tenn._
    Manchester. Cong. Ch. “A Friend.”                          5.00
    Middlebury. Miss M. A. Mead                                2.00
    Ripton. Rev. Moses Patten and family                      10.00
    Royalton. A. W. Kenney                                    20.00
    Saint Johnsbury. FRANKLIN FAIRBANKS to const.
      himself. FRANCES A. FAIRBANKS, MARY F.
      FAIRBANKS and ELLEN H. FAIRBANKS L. Ms.                250.00
    Shoreham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              24.00
    Springfield. Cong. Ch, and Soc. (15 of which
      _for Avery Inst._)                                      75.82
    Vergennes. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             10.00
    West Brattleborough. Dr. C. S. Clark, 25; Mrs.
      F. C Gaines, 5; _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     30.00
    Westfield. Cong. Ch.                                       7.14
    Windham. Cong Sabbath School, ad’l to const.
      ADELBERT J. STEARNS, L. M.                              12.62
    Woodstock. Mr. and Mrs. W. S. Lewis                        8.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $11,366.57.

    Amherst. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 40;
      College Ch., Prof Jos. K. Chickering, 30, to
      const. FRANCIS C. BRIGGS L. M.; North Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., 30, to const. MRS. NANCY E.
      HARRINGTON L. M.                                       100.00
    Andover. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., 100; Mrs.
      David Gray, 10                                         110.00
    Barre. E. C. Ch., to const. B. F. PHELPS and
      A. A. HUNT L. Ms.                                       61.10
    Bernardston. Orthodox Cong. Soc.                           3.50
    Belchertown. Mrs. R. W. Walker                             5.00
    Boston. Mrs. R. W. Prout 5, and bundle
      “Congregationalists”                                     5.00
    Brimfield. Mrs. P. C. Browning, 10; Mrs. J. S.
      Upham, 3                                                13.00
    Brookfield. Evan. Cong. Ch.                              100.00
    Buckland. Mrs. Sally Gillett, FOR LIFE
      MEMBERSHIPS                                          1,600.00
    Cambridge. North Av. Cong. Ch.                           505.36
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch., 20; Mon. Con.
      Coll., 10.83                                            30.83
    Chelsea. Ladies’ Union Home Mission Band, _for
      Lady Miss’y, Chattanooga, Tenn._                       100.00
    Chicopee. Third Cong. Ch.                                 21.91
    Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., in
      part, 343.09; Second Cong. Sab. Sch., 22.21            365.30
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               45.00
    Foxborough. Or. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        28.13
    Gilbertville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          33.00
    Greenfield. Hon. W. B. Washburn, _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Building_                     100.00
    Groton. Miss Elizabeth Farnsworth                         20.00
    Hanson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 8.00
    Hatfield. Rev. R. M. Woods                                50.00
    Haverhill. North Cong. Ch and Soc.                       200.00
    Holland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                7.34
    Holliston. “Bible Christians of District No. 4”           25.00
    Holyoke. Second Cong. Ch., 21.16; First Cong.
      Ch., 14.10                                              35.26
    Lakeville. Precinct Cong. Sab. Sch.                       11.70
    Lancaster. Evan Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        24.99
    Lynn. Rev. James L. Hill, _for President’s
      House. Talladega C._                                     2.30
    Littleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             30.00
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch. to const. HOLMES
      R. PETTEE L. M.                                         64.94
    Marshfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      77.20
    Middleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                      10.00
    Monson. Cong. Ch.                                        120.00
    North Abington. Rev. Jesse H. Jones                        5.00
    North Adams. First Cong. Ch.                              38.04
    Northampton. Rev. S. R. Butler                            10.00
    Northborough. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    75.00
    North Chelmsford. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.               25.00
    Norton. Trinity Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        58.32
    Newburyport. Belleville Ch and Soc. (ad’l)                 5.00
    Oakham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                43.02
    Pittsfield. Second Cong. Sab. Sch.                        10.00
    Prescott. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        10.10
    Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          25.00
    Reading. Old South Ch. and Soc.                           10.00
    Rockland. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. MRS.
      ELLEN D. BURRILL L. M.                                  50.00
    Salem. Crombie St. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      REV. HUGH ELDER L. M.                                   38.37
    South Egremont. Cong. Ch.                                 25.00
    Springfield. Memorial Ch., 24; A. C. Hunt, 10             34.00
    South Sudbury. Ladies’ Home Mission Soc. Bbl.
      of C., _for Atlanta U._, Val. 34.17, and
      2.50 _for Freight_                                       2.50
    Sterling. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               5.00
    Stoughton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             10.00
    Sunderland. Cong. Ch. and Soc., bal. to const.
      DEA. RUFUS SMITH, MISS BELLE CHILDS and MISS
      KATE P. ARMS L. Ms.                                     14.70
    Sudbury. Un. Evan. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                       10.50
    Taunton. Trin. Cong. Ch., 180.59; Winslow Ch.
      and Soc., 28.26                                        208.85
    Tewksbury. Ladies Benev. Soc of Cong. Ch., Bbl
      of C., _for Talladega, Ala._
    Townshend. “A Friend in Cong. Ch.”                         5.00
    Turners Falls. “A Friend.”                                20.00
    Upton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           54.00
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             64.93
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         40.00
    Waquoit. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                8.00
    Watertown. Young Ladies’ Mission Band,
      Phillips Ch., _for Student Aid, Straight U._            50.00
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const
      REV. THOMAS BABB L. M.                                  30.00
    West Somerville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       11.00
    West Springfield. Second Cong. Ch.                        12.20
    Winchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     125.29
    Worcester. Piedmont Ch., 31.35; Dea. David
      Whitcomb, 10; Sam’l A. Pratt, 2, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              43.35
    Worcester. Salem St. Sab. Sch., _for Santee
      Agency, Neb._                                           25.00
    Worcester. Salem St. Ch.                                   3.70
                                                          ---------
                                                          $5,119.73

    LEGACIES.

    Rockland. Estate of Samuel Reed                          800.00
    Woburn. Estate of Dea. Thomas Richardson               5,346.84
    Worcester. Estate of Adeline Flagg, by Isaac
      Barber, Ex.                                            100.00
                                                          ---------
                                                         $11,366.57


  RHODE ISLAND, $21.00.

    Peace Dale. Cong. Ch.                                     21.00


  CONNECTICUT, $2,202.00.

    Bridgeport. Dea. E. W. Marsh, 20; Edward
      Sterling, 5, _for Land and Building, Austin,
      Texas_                                                  25.00
    Bristol. Mrs. P. L. Alcott                                 5.00
    Brooklyn. First Trin. Ch.                                 40.50
    Chaplin. Cong. Ch.                                        20.00
    Cheshire. “A Friend,” 20; Cong. Ch. 19.86                 39.86
    Danielsonville. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const.
      MRS. ELIZA STONE, MISS ISABELLA S. KERR and
      EVERETT S. DANIELSON L. Ms.                             90.00
    Derby. Sarah A. Hotchkiss, 5, L. De Forest, 1.
      _for Land and Building, Austin, Texas_                   6.00
    East Canaan. Cong. Ch.                                    15.13
    East Hartford. First Ch.                                  20.00
    Essex. C. H. Hubbard, _for Land and Building,
      Austin, Texas_                                          10.00
    Goshen. Mrs. Moses Lyman                                   5.00
    Greens Farms. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          47.01
    Guilford. A Friend in Third Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                            2.00
    Haddam. Cong. Ch.                                         18.00
    Hanover. Cong. Ch.                                        12.00
    Hartford. Talcott St. Cong. Ch.                            7.54
    Mansfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      17.75
    Marlborough. Cong. Ch.                                    11.06
    Milford. Plymouth Ch.                                     40.00
    New Haven. Edward Stevens, 100; D. D. Mallory.
      25; First Methodist Ch., 20, _for Land and
      Building, Austin, Texas_                               145.00
    New Haven. Davenport Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                   50.00
    New Haven. Mrs. Eunice M. Crane                           10.00
    New London. “Church of Christ”                            45.32
    New Milford. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Hampton N. & A. Inst._                             70.00
    New Preston. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                              1.00
    Norwich. First Cong. Ch.                                  70.00
    Norwich. Broadway Cong. Sab. Sch., 50; “Cash,”
      1, _for Land and Building, Austin, Texas_               51.00
    Pequabuck. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Preston City. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          35.50
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                       12.71
    South Norwalk. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., to
      const. EDWARD BEARD, MISS GERTRUDE H.
      BENEDICT, and MISS ELIZA G. PLATT L. Ms.               100.00
    Torringford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           35.00
    Torrington. L. Wetmore                                   100.00
    Voluntown & Sterling. Cong. Ch., bal. to
      const. MISS ELIZABETH W. CASSON L. M.                   16.00
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch.                                    46.00
    Washington. “Friends, P. & N.”                             9.00
    Watertown. Rev. B. D. Conkling and Wife                   15.00
    Westbrook. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 15.38; Dea.
      Horace Bushnell, 2.50                                   17.88
    Westford. Cong Ch.                                         3.00
    West Haven. Mrs. Emeline Smith. 20; Lewis C.
      Hubbard, 5; Mrs. E. C. Kimball 5; J. Hubbard
      50c., _for Land and Building, Austin, Texas_            30.50
    Wethersfield. Rev. G. J. Tillotson, _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst. Land_                           50.00
    Windham. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,369.76

    LEGACY.

    Torrington. Estate of Frederick P. Hills by
      Fredk. S. Loomis, Ex.                                  832.24
                                                          ---------
                                                          $2,202.00


  NEW YORK, $28,407.48.

    Brentwood. Elisha F. Richardson                          300.00
    Brooklyn. Mrs. Lewis Edwards                              25.00
    Camillus. Isaiah Wilcox                                   30.00
    Champion. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    City Island. M. E. Ch., 10.60, and Bbl. of
      Goods, _for Orphans, Tougaloo, Miss._                   10.60
    Gerry. Mrs. M. A. Sears                                  128.36
    Homer. Miss Nancy Knight                                   3.00
    Honeoye. E. M. Pitts                                      11.00
    Jamesport. Cong. Ch.                                       4.00
    Lebanon. M. Day, 20; Other Friends, 11.81, to
      const. ALFRED COLEMAN PICKETT L. M.                     31.81
    Le Roy. Mrs. L. A. Parsons                                 2.50
    Mount Vernon. “A Friend”                                 300.00
    New York. Z. Stiles Ely, 200; “A Friend,” .50;
      Mrs. Lucy Thurber, 5                                   255.00
    New York. S. T. Gordon, _for Chinese M._                  25.00
    New York. Royalty on Dr. Cowles’ Commentary               47.36
    Pekin. Mrs. Abigail Peck                                  15.00
    Portland. J. S. Coon                                      20.00
    Rochester. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                              8.10
    Rodman. John S. Sill                                      10.00
    Tarrytown. Dr. A. Smith                                    5.00
    Utica. Mrs. Sarah H. Mudge, _for Work for
      Women_                                                  10.00
    Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                                10.00
    Willsborough. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
                                                         ----------
                                                           1,263.73

    LEGACIES.

    Victor. Estate of Mrs. Emeline Lewis, by D.
      Henry Osborne, Ex.                                  25,643.75
    Waverly. Estate of P. Hepburn, by Howard
      Elmer, Ex.                                           1,500.00
                                                       ------------
                                                         $28,407.48


  NEW JERSEY, $517.00.

    East Orange. “L. F. H.”                                   10.00
    Morristown. E. A. Graves, _for Tillotson C. &
      N. Inst._                                              500.00
    Montclair. Mrs. J. H. Pratt’s S. S. Class,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          7.00




    PENNSYLVANIA, $27.55.
    Canton. H. Sheldon                                        10.00
    Farmers Valley. Mrs. J. E. Olds                            0.50
    Hyde Park. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                             12.05
    Newcastle. John Burgess                                    5.00


  OHIO, $309.32.

    Cleveland. Mrs. S. A. Bradbury                            20.00
    Geneva. “H. A. W.”                                         2.00
    Greensburg. Mrs. H. B. Harrington, _for Lady
      Miss’y, Macon, Ga._                                     20.00
    Lindenville. Mrs. Anson Jones, 1; Mrs. David
      Parker, 1, _for Talladega C._                            2.00
    Mantua. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Medina. First Cong. Ch.                                    2.00
    Newark. Welch Cong. Ch., 9; Plymouth Cong.
      Ch., 6                                                  15.00
    North Bloomfield. Miss Elizabeth Brown, _for
      Talladega C._                                           15.00
    Oberlin. Ladies Soc. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Lady Miss’y, Atlanta, Ga._                              75.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                 19.77
    Painesville. Mrs. L. A. M. Little, _20 for
      Indian M. and 10 for Chinese M._                        30.00
    Rockport. Cong. Ch.                                        8.00
    Savannah. J. A. Patterson                                  5.00
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                       40.00
    Tallmadge. Rev. Luther Shaw                               10.00
    Warren. Wm. C. Savage & Co.                                5.00
    Windham. First Cong. Ch.                                  30.55


  ILLINOIS, $1,900.50.

    Avon. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                                  3.72
    Bartlett. Cong. Ch.                                       28.06
    Bristol. Cong. Ch.                                         5.75
    Buda. Cong. Ch.                                           29.07
    Cairo. J. C. Walton, M.D., _for Church
      building, Jackson, Miss._                                5.00
    Chicago. South Cong. Ch., 80.15, to const. W.
      E. HALE L. M.; Lincoln Park Cong. Ch., 26.45           106.60
    Chicago. John S. Kendall, 20; Lyman Baird, 10;
      “A Friend in So. Cong. Ch.,” 5, _for
      Talladega C._                                           35.00
    Chicago. Young Ladies’ Soc. of N. E. Cong.
      Ch., _for Lady Miss’y, Fort Sully, Dak._                10.00
    Collinsville. J. F. Wadsworth                             10.00
    Danville. Mrs. Anna Swan                                   5.00
    Elgin. W. G. Hubbard                                      25.00
    Evanston. Cong. Ch.                                       26.49
    Forrest. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.68
    Freeport. L. A. Warner                                    25.00
    Gridley. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
    Harvard. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Joy Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                    17.50
    Kewanee. Missionary Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Tougaloo U._                                            20.00
    La Salle. Sarah Lathrop                                    9.00
    Oak Park. Onward Mission Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Payson. J. K. Scarborough, to const. MISS MARY
      C. BARKER and MISS CARRIE KAY L. Ms.                    60.00
    Shabbona. First Cong. Ch.                                 42.05
    Sheffield. Cong. Ch.                                      25.00
    Sycamore. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           20.00
    Wataga. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                       0.58
    Wythe. Cong. Ch.                                           4.00
                                                          ---------
                                                            $610.50

    LEGACIES.

    Pittsfield. Estate of Rev. William Carter, by
      Wm. C. Carter, Ex.                                     500.00
    Galesburg. Estate of Warren C. Willard, by
      Prof. T. R. Willard, Ex.                               290.00
    Dover. Bequest of Geo. Wells and Wife, in part           500.00
                                                         ----------
                                                          $1,900.00


  MICHIGAN, $399.57.

    Bradley. First Cong. Ch.                                   1.57
    Galesburg. P. H. Whitford                                100.00
    Homer. “A Friend”                                          5.00
    Hopkins. First Cong. Ch.                                   3.98
    Jackson. First Cong. Ch.                                 250.00
    Kalamazoo. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                              9.30
    Litchfield. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., _for Woman’s
      Work_                                                   11.00
    Middleville. Cong. Ch.                                     6.15
    Olivet. Cong. Ch.                                          2.57
    South Haven. C. Pierce                                    10.00


  IOWA, $312.61.

    Atlantic. “Friends in Cong. Ch.,” 10; Mrs. H.
      J. Barnett (5 of which _for Student Aid_),
      10, _for Talladega C._                                  20.00
    Atlantic. Mrs. Milo Whiting, 5; Cong. Sab.
      Sch., 2.39                                               7.39
    Big Rock. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Cedar Falls. Wm. C. Bryant, _for President’s
      House, Talladega C._                                    10.00
    Cedar Falls. Cong. S. S., _for Needmore
      Chapel, Talladega, Ala._                                 5.00
    Cedar Rapids. Cong. Ch.                                   24.63
    Cherokee. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                10.52
    Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                 43.00
    Chester Center. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Miss’y, New Orleans, La._                                1.50
    Council Bluffs. Cong. Ch. (in part), _for
      Talladega C._                                           21.50
    Davenport. Harry Sales, 10; “A Friend,” 2,
      _for Talladega C._                                      12.00
    Davenport. Three Children of Geo. Russell,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          0.75
    Des Moines. Mrs. D. S. Cleghorn, _for
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Elkader. Mrs. M. H. Carter                                 5.00
    Fairfax. First Cong. Ch.                                   4.25
    Farmersburg. Cong. Ch.                                     2.50
    Fayette. Cong. Ch.                                        11.50
    Fort Dodge. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Monticello. Cong. Ch.                                     13.00
    New Hampton. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                           2.80
    Old Man’s Creek. Welsh Cong. Ch.                          16.00
    Sabula. Mrs. H. H. Wood                                    5.00
    Seneca. Rev. O. Littlefield and Wife                      12.00
    Waterloo. Ladies, _for Freight, for Talladega
      C._                                                      2.00
    Waterloo. John H. Leavitt, 50; “Hawkeye,”
      2.27, _for President’s House, Talladega C._             52.27
    Wintersett. Mrs. S. J. Dinsmore, 8; Mrs. C. W.
      Parlin, 5                                               13.00


  WISCONSIN, $222.13.

    Arena. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady Miss’y
      Montgomery, Ala._                                        6.00
    Brodhead. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Miss’y, Montgomery, Ala._                                5.00
    Brandon. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Miss’y, Montgomery, Ala._                               10.00
    Clinton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Miss’y, Montgomery, Ala._                                1.00
    Delavan. Cong. Ch.                                        49.00
    Eau Claire. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Miss’y, Montgomery, Ala._                               15.70
    Evansville. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Miss’y, Montgomery, Ala._                                1.00
    Fulton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady Miss’y,
      Montgomery, Ala._                                        5.00
    Hartland. Cong. Ch.                                       12.00
    Ironton. Cong. Ch.                                         7.90
    Lancaster. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Miss’y, Montgomery, Ala._                                5.00
    Oconomowoc. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
    Pewaukee. Cong. Ch.                                        8.00
    Pierce City. Cong. Ch.                                     8.70
    Racine. Presb. Ch.                                        28.80
    Rio. Cong. Ch.                                             3.00
    River Falls. Cong. Ch.                                    19.35
    Sun Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
    Wauwatosa. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Miss’y, Montgomery, Ala._                                1.00
    Whitewater. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 10.55;
      Primary Class in Sab. Sch., 2.13, _for Lady
      Miss’y, Montgomery, Ala._                               12.68
    Wyocena. Cong. Ch.                                         3.00


  MINNESOTA, $164.63.

    Anoka. Cong. Ch., 9.60; George A. Clark, 10               19.60
    Brownsville. Mrs. S. M. McHose                             2.00
    Clearwater. Cong. Ch.                                      4.72
    Cottage Grove. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                        26.50
    Fairmont. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    Hastings. D. B. Truax                                      5.00
    Marshall. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 8.75
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 19.33; Pilgrim
      Cong. Ch., 9.08; Vine St. Cong. Ch., 4.75               33.16
    Owatonna. Cong. Ch.                                        8.90
    Sauk Rapids. Cong. Ch.                                     4.00
    ——. “Friends,” _for Talladega C._                         50.00


  KANSAS, $41.71.

    Highland. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Cawker City. Cong. Ch.                                     3.10
    Osawatomie. Cong. Ch.                                     11.00
    Ottawa. Cong. Ch.                                         12.00
    Sterling. Cong. Ch.                                       10.61


  MISSOURI, $15.00.

    Joplin. Rev. W. P. Clancy                                  5.00
    Saint Louis. Pilgrim Sab. Sch.                            10.00


  NEBRASKA, $99.81.

    Camp Creek. Cong Ch. and Sab. Sch.                         3.65
    Clay Center. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
    Humboldt. J. B. White                                     20.00
    Fairmont. Cong. Ch.                                       45.00
    Reserve. Cong. Ch.                                         2.70
    Steele City. Cong. Ch.                                    10.01
    West Point. Cong. Ch.                                      3.20
    Wisner. Cong. Ch.                                          5.35
    York. Cong. Ch.                                            4.90


  WASHINGTON TER., $1.25.

    Houghton. First Ch. of Christ                              1.25


  CALIFORNIA, $10.00.

    National City. T. Parsons                                 10.00


  VIRGINIA, $7.00.

    Herndon. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00


  TENNESSEE, $12.00.

    Knoxville. Second Cong. Ch.                               12.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $5.00.

    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $10.00.

    Charleston. Plymouth Ch.                                  10.00


  GEORGIA, $20.00.

    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch.                                  15.00
    Macon. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00


  ALABAMA, $13.10.

    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                          3.10
    Talladega. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $131.77.

    Jackson. Citizens, _for Cong. Ch., Jackson,
      Miss._                                                 100.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition                            31.77


  TEXAS, $3.00.

    Austin. W. L. Gordon, 4 vols., _for Tillotson
      C. & N. Inst._
    Corpus Christi. Rev. S. M. Coles, 1 vol., _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._
    Paris. Madeville African Cong. Ch., _for Mendi
      M._                                                      2.00
    Paris. First Cong. Ch., Mon. Con. Coll.                    1.00


  INCOMES, $2,043.23.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                             1,828.96
    De Forest Fund, _for President’s Chair,
      Talladega C._                                            0.72
    C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                        50.00
    General Endowment Fund                                    50.00
    Income, _for Atlanta U._                                   9.84
    Luke Memorial Fund                                         5.00
    Theological Endowment Fund, _for Howard U._               57.26
    Theo. Endowment Fund, _for Fisk U._                        3.20
    Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._                         38.25


  SANDWICH ISLANDS, $200.00.

    Sandwich Islands. “A Friend”                             200.00


  CHINA, $5.00.

    Shanghai. Rev. Luther H. Gulick, D.D.                      5.00
                                                        -----------
      Total                                              $49,987.34
      Total from Oct. 1 to Sept. 30                     $312,567.29
                                                        ===========

         *       *       *       *       *

  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions                                             31.62
    Previously acknowledged                                  771.96
                                                             ------
      Total                                                 $803.58

         *       *       *       *       *

  FOR ENDOWMENT FUND.

    Boston, Mass. “A Friend,” _for Howard U._                 50.00

         *       *       *       *       *

  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Income Fund                                              967.00
    Previously acknowledged                                  450.53
                                                            -------
      Total                                               $1,417.53
                                                          =========

                                     H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                               56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




                           TO INVESTORS.

             $925 will buy a $1,000 6 per cent. gold
                        coupon bond of the

                East and West R. R. Co. of Alabama

This is a strictly first-class investment bond secured by a first
mortgage on an old road, fully built and equipped, that has always
paid its interest, and earns a dividend on its stock besides. This
bond will pay you =$30= every six months. No taxes, no trouble, and
a safe investment. For sale by the EAST AND WEST R. R. CO. OF ALA.,
502 B’way, or AMERICAN LOAN AND TRUST CO., 113 B’way, N.Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *




CONSTITUTION OF THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


ART. I. This Society shall be called the American Missionary
Association.

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in
the practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the
funds, may become a member of the Society; and, by the payment of
$30, a life member; provided that children and others who have not
professed their faith may be constituted life members without the
privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, Corresponding Secretaries (who shall also keep the
records of the Association), Treasurer, Auditors and an Executive
Committee of not less than twelve members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counseling, sustaining and
dismissing missionaries and agents; the selection of missionary
fields; and, in general, the transaction of all such business
as usually appertains to the executive committees of missionary
and other benevolent societies; the Committee to exercise no
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the missionaries; and its doings
to be subject always to the revision of the annual meeting, which
shall, by a reference mutually chosen, always entertain the
complaints of any aggrieved agent or missionary, and the decision
of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.

ART. VIII. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. IX. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world: the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit; repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked and salvation of the righteous.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROPOSED CONSTITUTION OF THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


ART. I. This society to be called the American Missionary
Association.

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Members may be constituted for life by the payment of
thirty dollars into the treasury of the Association, with the
written declaration at the time or times of payment that the sum is
to be applied to constitute a designated person a life member; and
such membership shall begin sixty days after the payment shall have
been completed.

Every church which has within a year contributed to the funds of
the Association and every State Conference or Association of such
churches may appoint two delegates to the Annual Meeting of the
Association; such delegates, duly attested by credentials, shall be
members of the Association for the year for which they were thus
appointed.

ART. IV. The Annual Meeting of the Association shall be held in
the month of October or November, at such time and place as may be
designated by the Executive Committee, by notice printed in the
official publication of the Association for the preceding month.

ART. V. The officers of the Association shall be a President,
five Vice-Presidents, a Corresponding Secretary or Secretaries,
a Recording Secretary, a Treasurer, Auditors, and an Executive
Committee of fifteen members, all of whom shall be elected by
ballot.

At the first Annual Meeting after the adoption of this
Constitution, five members of the Executive Committee shall be
elected for the term of one year, five for two years and five for
three years, and at each subsequent Annual Meeting, five members
shall be elected for the full term of three years, and such others
as shall be required to fill vacancies.

ART. VI. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds, the appointing, counseling, sustaining
and dismissing of missionaries and agents, and the selection of
missionary fields. They shall have authority to fill all vacancies
in office occurring between the Annual Meetings; to apply to any
Legislature for acts of incorporation, or conferring corporate
powers; to make provision when necessary for disabled missionaries
and for the widows and children of deceased missionaries, and in
general to transact all such business as usually appertains to the
Executive Committees of missionary and other benevolent societies.
The acts of the Committee shall be subject to the revision of the
Annual Meeting.

Five members of the Committee constitute a quorum for transacting
business.

ART. VII. No person shall be made an officer of this Association
who is not a member of some evangelical church.

ART. VIII. Missionary bodies and churches or individuals may
appoint and sustain missionaries of their own, through the agency
of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. IX. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution except by
the vote of two-thirds of the members present at an Annual Meeting,
the amendment having been approved by the vote of a majority at the
previous Annual Meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *


                           TO MAKE YOUR

                      SUNDAY-SCHOOL BRIGHTER,

                               YOUR

                           HOME HAPPIER,

                           SUBSCRIBE FOR

                          THE FOUR PAPERS

                      Old and Young,
                            Good Words,
                                Good Cheer,
                                     My Paper.

            Examine before you buy elsewhere. Samples
                       free on application.

                     E. W. HAWLEY, Secretary,
                                   Box 3304, New York City.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            SKIN HUMORS

                          CAN BE CURED BY

                       GLENN’S SULPHUR SOAP.


                                 SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 16, 1883.

  _Mr. C. N. Crittenton_:

  DEAR SIR: I wish to call your attention to the good your
  Sulphur Soap has done me. For nearly fourteen years I have been
  troubled with a skin humor resembling salt rheum. I have spent
  nearly a small fortune for doctors and medicine, but with only
  temporary relief. I commenced using your “Glenn’s Sulphur Soap”
  nearly two years ago—=used it in baths and as a toilet soap
  daily. My skin is now as clear as an infant’s, and no one would
  be able to tell that I ever had a skin complaint.= I would not
  be without the soap if it cost five times the amount.

  Yours respectfully,
                                                 M. H. MORRIS.

  LICK HOUSE, San Francisco, Cal.

The above testimonial is indisputable evidence that Glenn’s Sulphur
Soap will eliminate poisonous Skin Diseases WHEN ALL OTHER MEANS
HAVE FAILED. To this fact thousands have testified; and that it
will banish lesser afflictions, such as common PIMPLES, ERUPTIONS
and SORES, and keep the skin clear and beautiful, is absolutely
certain. For this reason ladies whose complexions have been
improved by the use of this soap NOW MAKE IT A CONSTANT TOILET
APPENDAGE. The genuine always bears the name of C. N. CRITTENTON,
115 Fulton street, New York, sole proprietor. For sale by all
druggists or mailed to any address on receipt of 30 cents in
stamps, or three cakes for 75 cents.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           J. & R. LAMB,

                        59 Carmine Street.

                  Sixth Ave. cars pass the door.

                          [Illustration]

                              BANNERS

                             IN SILK,

                           NEW DESIGNS.

                         CHURCH FURNITURE

                    SEND FOR HAND BOOK BY MAIL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        PEARLS IN THE MOUTH

                          [Illustration]

                       Beauty and Fragrance

                 Are communicated to the mouth by

                             SOZODONT

which renders the _teeth pearly white_, the gums rosy, and the
_breath sweet_. By those who have used it, it is regarded as an
indispensable adjunct of the toilet. It thoroughly _removes tartar_
from the teeth, without injuring the enamel.

                         SOLD BY DRUGGISTS

                            EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            NEW BOOKS.

We have in hand the following list of new books and cards that we
are confident will meet the wants of our friends, and will be found
suited to both old and young:


Among the Mongols.

By REV. JAMES GILMOUR. A fresh and most interesting account of
the home life, manners and customs, occupations and surroundings,
religious beliefs and practices of this strange people living
between Siberia on the north and China on the south. Illustrated
with over thirty original cuts and map. 12 mo. 398 pp. $1.50.


Scottish Sketches.

By MRS. A. E. BARR. Admirable life-pictures, drawn by a hand of
rare skill and power. The tales are exceedingly interesting; and
Scottish scenes and traits of character, customs and dialect all
combine to give a peculiar charm to the volume. 12 mo. 320 pp. 6
cuts. $1.25.


Daisy Snowflake’s Secret.

By MRS. G. S. REANEY. A grand temperance story for young ladies,
showing what they may do to close our homes against such secrets as
darkened the young heart of Daisy Snowflake. Written by a popular
English authoress. 12 mo. 296 pp. 6 cuts. $1.25


Cluny MacPherson.

By MRS. A. E. BARR. A story for young people, disclosing Scottish
life in all its strength and depth, its romance, simplicity and
beauty, with its marked religious element. The writer is familiar
with Scotland, and her work is sure to be widely popular. 12 mo.
311 pp. 5 cuts. $1.25.


Central Africa, Japan and Fiji.

By E. R. PITMAN. Sketches, fully illustrated, of three of the most
interesting mission fields of the present day, showing what has
been done and what remains to do in bringing them to Christ. 12 mo.
296 pp. Over 60 cuts. $1.25.


Our Brothers and Sons.

By Mrs. G. S. REANEY. A book intended to be placed in the hands of
young men, bringing out truths such as they need to be interested
in; written in a most attractive style. 12 mo. 270 pp. $1.


Our Daughters;

THEIR LIVES HERE AND HEREAFTER.

By Mrs. G. S. REANEY. A book full of best suggestions for young
ladies, written by a warm-hearted Christian woman, full of facts to
interest those for whom it is intended. 12 mo. 250 pp. $1.


Wayside Springs.

By Rev. T. L. CUYLER, D.D. Like all of Dr. Cuyler’s writings, these
sketches are refreshing as a spring of cold water to a traveler,
and every one comes from the heavenly fountain. Square 16 mo. 160
pp. Limp cloth, 50 cts.; gilt edge, with portrait of author, 75 cts.


Morning Thoughts for Our Daughters.

By Mrs. G. S. REANEY. Containing a text of Scripture and a short
devotional meditation for daily use in the home or school life of
the young. Square 16 mo. 160 pp. Limp, 50 cts.; gilt, 75 cts.


  Little Glory’s Mission
      AND
          Found at Last.

By Mrs. G. S. REANEY. Two most touching stories of life among the
lowly poor, full of encouragement to those who go about doing good.
16 mo. 186 pp. 4 cuts. 75 cents.


                          POPULAR SERIES.

Under this title we are issuing a class of books intended for
general distribution, giving good reading at a low price. They are
on good paper, well printed, and bound in boards, with cloth back
and fancy side. All the books are illustrated.

  PILGRIM’S PROGRESS. 260 pp. 25 cts.
  ANNALS OF THE POOR. 25 cts.
  MIRAGE OF LIFE. 204 pp. 25 cts.
  LITTLE MEG’S CHILDREN. 20 cts.
  ALONE IN LONDON. 160 pp. 20 cts.
  JESSICA’S FIRST PRAYER. 15 cts.
  GRANDFATHER’S BIRTHDAY. 15 cts.
  AUNT ROSE. 64 pp. 15 cts.

                      AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY,

  150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK, or
      BOSTON, 52 Bromfield Street;
          PHILADELPHIA, 1512 Chestnut Street;
              ROCHESTER, 75 State Street;
                  CHICAGO, 153 Wabash Avenue;
                      SAN FRANCISCO, 757 Market Street.


                 *       *       *       *       *


              The New American Dictionary only $1.00

Contains 1,000 ENGRAVINGS and 100 PAGES MORE than any other book of
the kind ever published.

[Illustration]

This useful and elegant volume is a Library and Encyclopedia of
general knowledge, as well as the best Dictionary in the world.
Superbly bound in cloth and gilt. No pocket affair, but a large
volume. It contains every useful word in the English language,
with its true meaning, derivation, spelling and pronunciation, and
a vast amount of absolutely necessary information upon Science,
Mythology, Biography, American History, Insolvent land and interest
laws, etc., being a =perfect Library of Reference=. Webster’s
Dictionary costs $9.00 and the New American Dictionary costs only
=$1.00=.

                     Read what the Press Says:

“We have never seen its equal, either in price, finish or
contents.”—THE ADVOCATE. “Worth ten times the money.”—TRIBUNE AND
FARMER. “A perfect dictionary and library of reference.”—LESLIE
ILL’D NEWS. “We have frequent occasion to use the New American
Dictionary in our office and regard it well worth the price.”
—CHRISTIAN UNION. “With the New American Dictionary in the
library for reference, many other much more expensive works can be
dispensed with, and ignorance of his country, history, business,
law, etc., is inexcusable in any man.”—SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

Note the price $1.00 post paid; Two Copies for $1.75.

=Extraordinary Offer.= If any person will get up a Club of Ten at
=$1.00= each we will send FREE as a premium the American Waterbury
Stew Winding watch.

  For a =Club= of =15= we will send free, a Solid Silver Hunting
    Case Watch.
  For a =Club= of =30= we send free, a Lady’s Solid Gold Hunting
    Case Watch.
  For a =Club= of =50= we will send free, Gents’ Solid Gold Hunting
    Case Watch.

Send a dollar at once for a sample only. You can easily secure
one of these watches in a day or two or during your leisure time
evenings. Address,

           World M’f’g Co., 122 Nassau Street, New York.

                 *       *       *       *       *

              THIS SPLENDID COIN SILVER HUNTING CASE

                            WATCH FREE

  To any person who will
  send us an order for

  =15= NEW AMERICAN
  DICTIONARIES,
  At One Dollar Each.

[Illustration]

Any person can readily secure Fifteen subscribers in one or two
hours or in a single evening. If you want a good Solid =Coin
Silver Watch= and want to get it =Without Money= you can easily
do so. Send =One Dollar= for a sample copy of the =New American
Dictionary= and see how easy you can get up a club of =Fifteen=.

                         WHAT AGENTS SAY:

I obtained 14 subscribers in as many minutes. ROBT. H. WOOD, office
of the Auditor of the Treasury P. O. Department, Washington,
D.C.—I secured 30 subscribers in one afternoon. Miss Laura Coil,
Annapolis, Mo.—Sold my Premium Silver Watch for $18. A. B. Gerken,
Florence, Mo. Send money by registered letter or Post Office Money
Order. =48= Page Illustrated Catalogue of Guns, Self-cocking
Revolvers, Telescopes, Spy Glasses Watches, Accordeons, Violins,
Organettes, Magic Lanterns, &c. free.

          WORLD MANUF’G CO., 122 Nassau Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                25 Cts. for Perfect Musical Outfit

=EXTRAORDINARY BARGAIN.= Almost every household in the United
States has some kind of Musical Instrument, from the plain Melodeon
to the expensive Grand Piano. Not one in a thousand persons ever
become adepts in the art of Music, which even Mendelsohn and
Mozart could not become masters of technically. But =Buckner’s
Musical Chart= does away with the necessity of becoming proficients
in the art. It is the result of years of intense application,
by a =Leading Professor=, and is a =thorough= though =simple,
Self-Instructor= for Melodeon, Piano, or Organ. A child (without
the aid of a teacher,) can learn =in a few hours= to play any of
these instruments =as easily= as if it had gone through months of
instruction and hard practice. =It is a grand invention= and saves
hundreds of dollars to any person lucky enough to possess one.
If you already have the rudiments of music, this will aid you in
mastering the whole art; if not, you can go right ahead, =and learn
all, easily and perfectly=. Have you no musical instrument on which
to practice? A few minutes each day at some friend’s residence
will make you perfect, so that you can play anywhere in response
to calls. The highest class of Professors of Music unite in saying
that =Buckner’s Music Chart= leads anything of its kind. Heretofore
the Chart has never been sold for less than =$1.00=, but now, that
WE have secured the sale of the genuine, we have resolved to send
the Chart for =Twenty-Five Cents= and also, the send =34 Pieces
of Beautiful Music=, vocal and instrumental,—full music sheet
size, =Free= to every purchaser. All the new opera gems of Mascot,
Billee Taylor, Olivette, Waltzes, Songs, Mazourkas, Quadrilles,
etc., words and music. Music lovers have =never had such bargains
offered=.

=STOP AND THINK! 34 Complete Pieces of Music=, in addition to
=Buckners Musical Chart=, all for =ONLY 25 CENTS=. This is no
catchpenny announcement. Our house is among the staunchest in New
York City—having a well earned reputation to sustain. Our neighbors
in the best part of the city, =know us=, for we have been among
them for years. The leading Newspaper and the great Commercial
Agencies all know us, and speak in good terms of us. =25= cents
sent to us will insure your receiving by return mail, postage free,
=One Buckner’s Chart=, and =34 Pieces of Popular Music=. If you
are not entirely satisfied, we will return the money. Will send
Three Charts of Three Sets of Music for =Sixty Cents=. =1= ct. and
=2= ct. postage stamps taken. =48= page illustrated catalogue of
Organettes, Violins, Accordeons, Magic Lanterns, &c. sent free.
Address all orders to =World Manuf’g Co. 122 Nassau Street, New
York=.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      MASON & HAMLIN ORGANS.

              A cable dispatch announces that at the

                International Industrial Exhibition

                 (1883) now in progress (1883) at

                      AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS,

                These Organs have been Awarded the

                      GRAND DIPLOMA OF HONOR,

Being the VERY HIGHEST AWARD, ranking above the GOLD MEDAL, and
given only for EXCEPTIONAL SUPER-EXCELLENCE.

 THUS IS CONTINUED THE UNBROKEN SERIES OF TRIUMPHS OF THESE ORGANS

           AT EVERY GREAT WORLD’S INDUSTRIAL EXHIBITION

                        FOR SIXTEEN YEARS,

No other American Organs having been found equal to them in any.


THE RECORD OF TRIUMPHS of MASON & HAMLIN ORGANS in such severe and
prolonged comparisons by the BEST JUDGES OF SUCH INSTRUMENTS IN THE
WORLD now stands: at

  PARIS, FRANCE. 1867
  VIENNA, AUSTRIA. 1873
  SANTIAGO, CHILI. 1875
  PHILA., U.S. AMER. 1876
  PARIS, FRANCE. 1878
  MILAN, ITALY. 1878
  AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS. 1883

The Testimony of Musicians is Equally Emphatic.

[Illustration: THE NEW WORLD SAYS

  “MUCH
  THE BEST
  MUSICIANS GENERALLY
  SO REGARD THEM”

  THEO-THOMAS
  AND
  THOUSANDS OF OTHERS.]

[Illustration: THE OLD WORLD SAYS

  “MATCHLESS”
  “UNRIVALED”

  FRANZ LISZT
  AND
  HUNDREDS OF OTHERS.]

              A NEW ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE FOR 1883-4

(dated October, 1883) is now ready and will be sent free; including
MANY NEW STYLES—the best assortment and most attractive organs
we have ever offered. ONE HUNDRED STYLES are fully described and
illustrated, adapted to all uses, in plain and elegant cases in
natural woods, and superbly decorated in gold, silver and colors.
Prices, $22 for the smallest size, but having as much power as any
single reed organ and the characteristic Mason & Hamlin excellence,
up to $900 for the largest size. 50 styles between $100 and $200.
_Sold also for easy payments._ Catalogues free.


              THE MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN AND PIANO CO.,

154 Tremont St., Boston; 46 East 14th Street (Union Square), New
York; 149 Wabash Avenue, Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. to 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                    In First Mortgage Bonds ON

                         IMPROVED FARMS in

                          Iowa, Minnesota

                            and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.


          _11 Years’ Experience. Loans Absolutely Safe._

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


            _BRANCH BANKS AT MITCHELL AND HURON, D.T._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,


                   FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                       COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  SMITH
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS]

                           ARE THE BEST.


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  THE
  RISING SUN
  STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  ANNUAL MEETING OF THE A. M. A.


The Thirty-seventh Annual Meeting of the American Missionary
Association will be held in the Central Congregational Church,
Brooklyn, N.Y. (Dr. Behrends’), beginning Tuesday, October 30, at 3
P.M., and closing on the evening of Thursday, November 1.

The sermon will be preached by Rev. John L. Withrow, D.D., of
Boston, Mass., Tuesday evening, at 7:30, to be followed by the
communion service.

The following persons have promised to take part in the meetings:
Rev. E. B. Webb, D.D.; Pres. S. C. Bartlett, D.D.; Rev. Washington
Gladden, D.D.; Rev. Wm. Allen Bartlett, D.D.; Rev. Wm. H. Willcox,
D.D.; Hon. Alpheus Hardy; Prof. Llewellyn Pratt, D.D.; Prof. Wm. M.
Barbour, D.D.; Rev. D. O. Mears, D.D.; Rev. W. H. Ward, D.D.; Rev.
Samuel Scoville; Rev. E. W. Bacon; Rev. Wm. S. Palmer, D.D.; Rev.
D. K. Flickinger, D.D.; Rev. Geo. M. Boynton; Rev. A. H. Bradford;
Rev. T. P. Prudden; Prof. C. G. Fairchild; Rev. Wm. M. Taylor,
D.D.; Mr. Yew Fun Tan, from Yale College, 1883; Mr. Wm. Harrison
McKinney, Choctaw Nation, Indian Territory, from Roanoke College,
1883; Rev. J. C. Price, Salisbury, N.C., Lincoln University, 1879;
Rev. A. A. Myers, from the mountain regions of Kentucky.

A meeting of the Bureau of Woman’s Work in connection with this
Association will be held Wednesday, at 2 P.M., at which Mrs. W. C.
Pond, San Francisco, Mrs. A. L. Riggs, from the Santee Agency, Miss
Ida M. Beach, Savannah, Mrs. A. A. Myers, of Kentucky, and others,
will be present and take part in the exercises.


                   RAILWAY AND STEAMBOAT FARES.

New York, New Haven & Hartford R. R.—Round-trip tickets to New
York from Springfield, $4.40, Hartford, $3.55; Middletown, $3.55;
New Britain, $3.50; Meriden, $2.95; New Haven, $2.35; New London,
$4.35; Saybrook, $3.60; Willimantic, $4.65; Bridgeport, $1.75;
South Norwalk, $1.35; Stamford, $1.05. Return coupons will not
be received for passage unless stamped by Richard M. Montgomery,
Secretary, at the meeting.

New Haven & Northampton R. R.—Round-trip tickets to New Haven from
North Adams, $4; Westfield, $2.00; Collinsville, $1.30; Farmington,
$1; Plainville, 95c.; Southington, 75c.; to which must be added
round-trip ticket from New Haven to New York, $2.35. These tickets
must also be stamped at the meeting.

Naugatuck R. R.—Round-trip tickets to Bridgeport from Winsted,
$2.40; Thomaston, $1.75; Waterbury, $1.34; to which must be added
round-trip ticket from Bridgeport to New York, $1.75. These tickets
must also be stamped at the meeting.

Housatonic R. R.—Round-trip tickets to Bridgeport from Pittsfield,
$4.55; from Great Barrington, $4.35; New Milford, $3.10,
Hawleysville, $2.40; to which must be added round-trip ticket from
Bridgeport to New York, $1.75. These tickets must also be stamped
at the meeting.

Connecticut River, Ashuelot, Vermont Valley and Sullivan County
railroads will give free return checks to those who pay full fare
one way. These checks must be obtained of the conductors while
passengers are en route to New York. See price of round-trip
tickets on connecting lines.

Central Vermont R. R. and New London & Northern R. R. will give
free return checks to those paying full fare in going over their
roads to attend the meeting, to be furnished by Richard M.
Montgomery during the sessions in Brooklyn.

Norwich and New York Transportation Co. will furnish round-trip
tickets from New London to New York for $3.

New York & New England R. R. will furnish round-trip tickets to
New York from Worcester via the Norwich line of boats for $4, and
from Norwich for $3. The tickets at Norwich to be purchased at the
Norwich & Worcester R. R. depot.

Delaware, Lackawanna & Western R. R. will return passengers who
have paid full fare from Buffalo to New York at one-third of the
regular rates on surrender of certificate to be furnished them by
Richard M. Montgomery at the meeting. For excursion rates, inquire
at nearest railway station.

New York, West Shore & Buffalo R. R., also the New York, Ontario
& Western, will return passengers who have paid full fare to New
York, at the rate of one cent per mile, on surrender of certificate
to be furnished by Richard M. Montgomery at the meeting.

All tickets good from Oct. 29 to Nov. 2.


                          ENTERTAINMENT.

The citizens of Brooklyn will cordially welcome to their homes all
persons in attendance at the meetings. Those wishing hospitality
should forward their applications as early as possible to Richard
M. Montgomery, 169 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N.Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *


        ATKIN & PROUT, Printers, 12 Barclay St., New York.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Period spelling retained.

Changed “BEQEATH” to “BEQUEATH” on the inside cover (I BEQUEATH to
my executor).

Changed “tho” to “the” on page 333 (the greatest of all).

Changed “Talladaga” to “Talladega” in the Montclair and Lindenville
entries on page 345.

Changed “Fragance” to “Fragrance” on page 349 (Beauty and Fragrance)

Changed “SPENDID” to “SPLENDID” on page 351 (THIS SPLENDID COIN
SILVER HUNTING CASE)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 37, NO. 11, NOVEMBER, 1883 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.