AN ACCOUNT
                                 OF THE
                       Battle of Wilson’s Creek,
                             OR OAK HILLS,
                           FOUGHT BETWEEN THE
                UNION TROOPS, COMMANDED BY GEN. N. LYON,
                                AND THE
 SOUTHERN, OR CONFEDERATE TROOPS, UNDER COMMAND OF GENS. McCULLOCH AND
                                 PRICE,
                                   ON
                       SATURDAY, AUGUST 10, 1861,
                                   IN
                        GREENE COUNTY, MISSOURI.


              WRITTEN AND COMPILED FROM AUTHENTIC SOURCES
                          By HOLCOMBE & ADAMS.


Published on the Twenty-Second Anniversary of the Battle, as a Full and
      Faithful Account, and as a Memorial of the Reunion of the
      Survivors of the Engagement of Both Sides, held August 8, 9, and
      10, 1883.


                         SPRINGFIELD, MISSOURI:
                        DOW & ADAMS, Publishers.
                                 1883.


                               St. Louis.
                     Nixon-Jones Printing Company.

    [Illustration: BRIG. GEN. NATHANIEL LYON.]

    [Illustration: GEN. STERLING PRICE.]


                               THIS BOOK
                    IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED TO THE
                             BLUE AND GRAY
                          WHO TOOK PART IN THE
                Battle of Wilson’s Creek, or Oak Hills,
                           August 10th, 1861.




                                CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I. PRELIMINARY MOVEMENTS TO THE BATTLE                       5
      FIRST FEDERAL TROOPS                                             6
      “SIGEL IS COMING!”                                               6
      GEN. SWEENEY COMES TO SPRINGFIELD                                7
      SIGEL DEPARTS FOR CARTHAGE                                       7
      GEN. LYON ENTERS THE COUNTY                                      8
      SWEENEY’S EXPEDITION TO FORSYTH                                  9
      CONFEDERATE MILITARY OPERATIONS                                  9
      THE FIGHT AT DUG SPRINGS                                        11
      GEN. LYON FALLS BACK                                            12
      THE SOUTHERN FORCES UNDER PRICE AND M’CULLOCH ENTER GREENE
          COUNTY—A GREAT BATTLE IMMINENT                              15
  CHAPTER II. THE BATTLE OF WILSON’S CREEK—THE UNION OR FEDERAL
          ACCOUNT                                                     17
      GEN. LYON IN SPRINGFIELD                                        17
      PRELIMINARIES OF THE FINAL STRUGGLE                             19
      A FALSE ALARM                                                   22
      A MESSENGER FROM FREMONT—NO HOPE!                               23
      CONFEDERATE MILITARY MOVEMENTS PRECEDING THE BATTLE             24
      GEN. LYON MARCHES OUT TO BATTLE                                 26
      THE MARCH BEGUN—ROUTE OF GEN. LYON                              28
      COL. SIGEL’S ADVANCE                                            29
      LYON OPENS THE BATTLE                                           31
      DEATH OF GEN. LYON                                              35
      STILL THE BATTLE GOES ON                                        37
      THE LAST GRAND CHARGE OF PRICE’S MEN                            37
      RETREAT                                                         39
      SIGEL’S PART IN THE FIGHT                                       40
      DR. S. H. MELCHER’S ACCOUNT                                     46
  CHAPTER III. THE BATTLE OF WILSON’S CREEK.—Concluded                51
      THE SOUTHERN SIDE OF THE STORY                                  51
      THE PART TAKEN BY M’CULLOCH’S ARMY                              51
      THE FEDERAL ATTACK                                              52
      THE FIGHT AGAINST LYON                                          54
      M’CULLOCH COMES TO THE RESCUE                                   55
      THE BEGINNING OF THE END                                        58
      VICTORY!                                                        58
      M’CULLOCH’S DESTRUCTION OF SIGEL                                59
      AFTER THE FAMOUS VICTORY                                        61
      COMPARATIVE STRENGTH AND LOSSES OF THE TWO ARMIES               62
      FEDERAL STRENGTH                                                62
      CONFEDERATE STRENGTH                                            63
      THE FEDERAL LOSS                                                64
      CONFEDERATE LOSS—PRICE’S ARMY                                   64
      DISPOSITION OF THE DEAD                                         66
      THE HOME GUARDS AT SPRINGFIELD                                  67
      THE RETREAT FROM SPRINGFIELD                                    68
      CARE OF THE UNION WOUNDED                                       69
      THE ARMY SETS OUT                                               69
      THE CONFEDERATES ENTER SPRINGFIELD                              70
      PROCLAMATION OF GEN. M’CULLOCH                                  71
      GEN. M’CULLOCH’S ORDER                                          72
      GEN. PRICE’S PROCLAMATION                                       73
      JOY AND CONGRATULATIONS                                         74
  CHAPTER IV. PROMINENT REGIMENTS AND OTHER SUBORDINATE COMMANDS
          ENGAGED IN THE BATTLE                                       76
      CONFEDERATE COMMANDS                                            76
      FEDERAL COMMANDS                                                84
      DISPOSITION OF THE BODY OF GEN. LYON                            96




                       BATTLE OF WILSON’S CREEK.




                               CHAPTER I.
                  PRELIMINARY MOVEMENTS TO THE BATTLE.


The Situation in Southwest Missouri After the Firing on Ft. Sumpter—The
      First Federal Troops in the Country—“Sigel is Coming!”—Gen.
      Sweeney Comes to Springfield—Sigel Departs for Carthage—Gen. Lyon
      Enters the Country—Sweeney’s Expedition to Forsyth—Confederate
      Military Operations—The Fight at Dug Springs—Gen. Lyon Falls
      back—Gens. Price and McCulloch Follow up—A Great Battle
      Imminent—Controversy Between Price and McCulloch.


In giving an account of the battle of Wilson’s Creek, or Oak Hills,
which though not the largest, has passed into history, as one of the
hardest and best fought battles of the American Civil War, it is
necessary to describe certain military movements and operations which
took place previously, in order that a better understanding of all of
the circumstances may be had. This must be done here briefly and in a
somewhat desultory way.

Upon the outbreak of the civil war in 1861, the people of Southwest
Missouri were divided in sentiment, although a majority of them were
Unionists. At the previous Presidential election, Lincoln, the
Republican candidate, had received 42 votes in Greene county alone, and
this district had sent unconditional Union candidates to the State
Convention the previous February by a vote of four to one. Union Home
Guards were organized in Springfield in May to the number of 1200,
composed of citizens of Greene, Christian, and adjoining counties and
commanded by Col. John S. Phelps (afterward Governor). The secessionists
in this quarter of the State were in the minority, but they were bold
and disposed to be aggressive.


                         FIRST FEDERAL TROOPS.

In a few days after the occupation of Rolla, Col. Franz Sigel took up
the line of march for Springfield. He had his own regiment, the 3d Mo.
Volunteers, and Col. Chas. E. Salomon’s 5th Missouri Volunteers. The
march from Rolla to Springfield was necessarily slow, as the Federals
were compelled to feel their way cautiously, but, considering all of the
circumstances, very good time was made. Detachments were sent out on
either side of the road from time to time, and the country pretty well
reconnoitered.


                           “SIGEL IS COMING!”

At last, on Sunday morning, June 24, 1861, the citizens of Springfield
who lived in the eastern part of town, looked out on the St. Louis road
and saw, coming leisurely along, a column of men led by others on
horseback. The wind lifted and shook out a banner, which, when unfolded,
showed the old familiar stripes in all their splendor and the stars in
all their beauty. Just then the band struck up a spirit-stirring air,
and the cry rang out and was caught up and borne through all the town,
“They are coming! They are coming!” If it was asked, “Who are coming?”
the reply sometimes was, “The Union soldiers,” but often came the
answer, “The Yankee Dutch.” People had different ways of looking at the
thing and different ideas altogether about the matter!

But whether they were “brave Union Germans” or “Yankee Dutch,” certain
it was that Sigel and his troops were in full possession of the town. It
was about 11:30 in the forenoon when the soldiers reached the main part
of town. Pickets were put out on all roads, and many prisoners made
among the citizens accused of real or premeditated “treason” against the
government. The court-house was pretty well filled at one time with
these prisoners. Some property was seized or “pressed” by the soldiers,
and their presence did not give universal or even general satisfaction.


                   GEN. SWEENEY COMES TO SPRINGFIELD.

On the 1st of July Gen. T. W. Sweeney (then really only a captain in the
regular army), having been _elected_ a brigadier by the St. Louis Home
Guards, came to Springfield with a force of, say 1,500 men, including
the 1st Iowa Infantry (dressed in gray uniforms) a portion of the 2d
Kansas, and some artillery and a battalion of regular dragoons.

By reason of his rank, which was recognized as that of brigadier, Gen.
Sweeney became the commander of the Federal army, then in Southwest
Missouri. He was a brigadier-general of Home Guards or U. S. Reserve
Corps; Sigel and Salomon and Brown were but colonels of volunteers.
Sweeney was an Irishman. He had but one arm, having lost the other in
the Mexican war. Like many another of his countrymen, he had more fight
in him than good judgment. Although starting in rank pretty well at the
top at the beginning of the war, he never attained any great military
distinction. After the war he led the Fenian raid into Canada, which
ended so ignominiously.


                      SIGEL DEPARTS FOR CARTHAGE.

After the battle of Boonville, June 17, the State forces, under Col.
Marmaduke and Gov. Jackson, retreated toward the Southwest portion of
the State to co-operate with the troops under Gen. Rains, and to be in
easy distance of the Confederate forces at Fayetteville, Ark., under
Gen. Ben McCulloch. News of this movement having reached Gen. Sigel at
Springfield, that officer at once set out to intercept it—to prevent, if
possible, a junction between the forces of Col. Marmaduke and those of
Gen. Rains, and to attack the latter and destroy him in his camp,
supposed to be near Rupe’s Point, in Jasper county.

“Pressing” a number of horses and wagons from the citizens of this
county, especially from about Springfield, Sigel, with the greater part
of his own and Salomon’s regiment and a company of regulars, set out
from Springfield westward on the Mt. Vernon road, one hot morning about
the 1st of July. His destination was Carthage, 65 miles away. He had
with him eight pieces of Backof’s artillery, 6 and 12 pounders. On the
5th the battle of Carthage was fought between the eight companies of
Sigel’s regiment, seven companies of Salomon’s and the artillery under
Backof on the Union side, and the State Guards under Gov. Jackson in
person, and Gens. Rains and Parsons. The Federals were defeated and fell
back to Mt. Vernon, Sigel being foiled in his attempt to prevent the
concentration of the secessionists.


                      GEN. LYON ENTERS THE COUNTY.

On the 3d of July Gen. Nathaniel Lyon, at the head of about 2,000
troops, left Boonville for the Southwest to co-operate with Sigel. On
the 25th of June five companies of cavalry, six companies of regular
infantry and dragoons, and ten companies of Kansas volunteers, in all
about 1,600 men, under command of Maj. S. D. Sturgis, left Kansas City,
destined also for Southwest Missouri. At Grand River, in Henry county,
the two commands formed a junction, and then started for Sigel. Hearing
of the latter’s defeat, and retreat to the eastward, Gen. Lyon changed
his direction more to the eastward and came into this county about the
13th of July, going into camp near Pond Spring, on section 31, township
29, range 23, in the western part of the county. Lyon came into the town
of Springfield July 13th, leaving, as he wrote to Chester Harding, his
troops, “a few miles back.”

Gen. Lyon was mounted on an iron-gray horse, and had an escort or
body-guard of ten men of the 1st regiment U. S. regular cavalry, all of
whom were men remarkable for their large size, strong physique, and fine
horsemanship. Lyon treated the citizens with courtesy and kindness,
although impressing their provisions and animals, to some extent, for
the use of his men. As soon as he arrived in this quarter he
communicated with Sigel, and with Gen. Fremont at St. Louis, asking the
latter to send him reinforcements at once. He also busied himself in
recruiting for the Federal service—issuing commissions to officers of
Home Guard companies, and mustering in enlisted men. Ho was visited by
Union men from counties north and east 75 miles away.


                    SWEENEY’S EXPEDITION TO FORSYTH.

Saturday, July 20, about 1,200 men were detailed under Gen. Sweeney to
break up a secession camp reported to be at Forsyth, the county seat of
Taney county. The command was composed of the two companies of regular
cavalry, under Capt. D. S. Stanley; a section of Capt. Totten’s battery,
in charge of Lt. Sokalski; about 500 men of the 1st Iowa Infantry, under
Lt. Col. Merritt; Capt. Wood’s company of mounted Kansas volunteers, and
the 2d Kansas Infantry, under Col. Mitchell. The expedition reached
Forsyth in the afternoon of Monday, captured the town with but little
difficulty, driving out about 200 State Guards, who had been quartered
in the court-house, and secured some blankets, clothing, guns,
provisions, horses and one or two prisoners. A quantity of lead was
taken from a well into which it had been thrown. Three shells were
thrown into the court-house after the Federals had possession of the
town.

Gen. Sweeney remained in Forsyth about 24 hours, and returned to
Springfield on Thursday. His loss was three men wounded, and Capt.
Stanley had a horse shot under him. It was reported that the
secessionists had five killed and ten wounded, among the latter being
one Capt. Jackson. A camp of 1,000 Confederates, at Yellville, Ark., was
not molested by Gen. Sweeney, although only 50 miles from Forsyth.


                    CONFEDERATE MILITARY OPERATIONS.

Meantime preparations were making among the secessionists of Missouri to
dispute the occupancy of the Southwest portion of the State with the
Federals. Gen. Ben McCulloch, of Texas, had been ordered by the
Confederate government to go to the assistance of its allies in
Missouri. Accordingly he rendezvoused at Fayetteville, Ark., where he
was joined by some Louisiana and Arkansas volunteers and a division of
Arkansas State troops. The Missouri State Guards, Gov. Jackson’s troops,
had rendezvoused, first near Sarcoxie, in Jasper county, afterward on
the Cowskin Prairie, in McDonald county, where some time was spent in
drilling, organizing and recruiting.

On the 25th of July, 1861, General Sterling Price, in command of Gov.
Jackson’s State Guard, began to move his command from its encampment on
the Cowskin Prairie toward Cassville, Barry county, at which place it
had been agreed between Generals McCulloch and N. B. Pearce, of the
Confederate force, and Price that their respective commands, together
with General J. H. McBride’s division of State Guards, should
concentrate, preparatory to a forward movement on Lyon and Sigel and the
other Federal troops in the vicinity of Springfield. On the 29th the
junction was effected. The combined armies were then put under marching
orders. The 1st division, commanded by Gen. McCulloch in person; the 2d,
by Gen. Pearce, of Arkansas, and the 3d, by Gen. Steen, of Missouri,
left Cassville on the 1st and 2d of August, taking the Springfield road.
It is said that Gen. Price, with the greater portion of his infantry,
accompanied the 2d division. A few days afterward a regiment of Texas
rangers, under Col. E. Greer, joined the martial host advancing to
attack the Federals. Gen. James S. Rains, formerly the well known
politician of Jasper county, with six companies of mounted Missourians
belonging to his division, the 8th, commanded the advance guard. Rains
was given the advance because many of his men were from this quarter of
the State and knew the country very well. On Friday, August 2, he
encamped at Dug Springs, in Stone county, about 20 miles southwest of
Springfield. The main army was some distance to the westward.

The Southern army was really composed of three small armies, as follows:
The Missouri State Guard, under Gen. Price; a division of Arkansas State
troops, under Gen. N. Bart. Pearce, and a division of Confederate troops
under Gen. McCulloch. Pearce’s division was composed of the 1st Arkansas
cavalry, Col. De Rosey Carroll; Capt. Chas. A. Carroll’s independent
company of cavalry; the 3d Arkansas infantry, Col. John R. Gratiot; the
4th Arkansas infantry, Col. J. D. Walker; the 5th Arkansas infantry,
Col. Tom P. Dockery, and Capt. Woodruff’s battery, the “Pulaski
Artillery.” All of the infantry regiments had enlisted only for three
months, and their time expired about Sept. 1. They were _State_ troops,
or militia. Another Arkansas battery, Capt. J. G. Reid’s, of Ft. Smith,
was also with Gen. Pearce, but assigned to McCulloch afterwards.


                       THE FIGHT AT DUG SPRINGS.

Gen. Lyon was duly informed of the concentration of the Southern troops
at Cassville, of the junction of Price and McCulloch, and of their
intention of marching upon his own camp. His scouts and spies were
numerous, sharp and faithful. They marched in the ranks with the
secession troops at times, hung about officers’ quarters, picked up all
the information they could and then made their way inside the Federal
lines in a very short time. For the most part Lyon’s scouts were
residents of this part of the State and knew all the country very
thoroughly. Gen. Price, too, had scouts and spies, who kept _him_
posted—who, by various ruses and stratagems visited the Federal camps,
and obtained valuable information and conveyed it to “Old Pap” in short
order. And Price’s scouts, too, were chiefly residents of Southwest
Missouri. A number of Greene county men did scouting for both Price and
Lyon.

Learning of the movements of Price and McCulloch, Gen. Lyon determined
to go out and meet them. He first sent more messengers to Gen. Fremont,
at St. Louis, begging for reinforcements, and late in the afternoon of
Thursday, the 1st of August, his entire army, which, by the addition of
Sigel’s and Sturgis’ forces, had been increased to 5,868 men of all
arms, infantry, cavalry and eighteen pieces of artillery, led by
himself, moved toward Cassville, leaving behind a force of volunteers
and Home Guards to guard Springfield. That night the army bivouacked
about ten miles southwest of Springfield, on a branch of the James. Gen.
Lyon’s subordinate commanders were Brig. Gen. T. W. Sweeney, Col. Sigel
and Maj. Sturgis. The next morning, early, the command moved forward. It
was a hot day and the men suffered severely from dust, heat and
excessive thirst, most of the wells and the streams being dry. Towards
evening five dollars was offered for a canteen of warm ditch water.

At Dug Springs the army halted, having come up with Gen. Rains’ advance
of the Southern forces. The Missourians were first observed about 11
o’clock in the forenoon, at a house by the roadside with a wagon
partially laden with cooked provisions, from which they were driven away
by shell from one of Capt. Totten’s guns. At the Dug Springs (which are
in an oblong valley, five miles in length and broken by projecting spurs
of the hills, which form wooded ridges), at about 5 o’clock in the
evening a skirmish took place between Rains’ secessionists and a
battalion of regular infantry under Capt. Fred Steele, a company of U.
S. dragoons under Capt. D. S. Stanley, and two 6-pounders of Capt.
Totten’s battery. The Southerners were driven away with a loss of one
killed, perhaps half a dozen wounded, and ten prisoners. A Lieutenant
Northent is reported as having been mortally wounded. The Federal loss
was four killed outright, one mortally wounded, and about thirty
slightly wounded. Three of the Federal killed were Corporal Klein, and
Privates Givens and Devlin.

On the side of the Missourians a young man named H. D. Fulbright, was
sunstruck in the engagement, and died. W. J. Frazier, of the Greene
County Company, attached to McBride’s division, was wounded.

The Federals pursued next morning, going as far as Curran, or McCullah’s
store, nearly on the county line between Stone and Barry counties, and
twenty-six miles from Springfield. During the day a scouting party of
secessionists, which had come across the country from Marionville, was
encountered at dinner. Totten’s artillery was brought up, a few shells
fired, and the Southern troops did not wait for the dessert! This is a
brief, but correct account of what is often referred to in histories of
the civil war as the “_battle_” of Dug Springs.


                         GEN. LYON FALLS BACK.

Finding that the enemy in his front was much his superior in numbers,
Gen. Lyon determined to go no farther than Curran, but to return to
Springfield and await the reinforcements so urgently requested of Gen.
Fremont before risking a decisive battle, the result of which would
certainly mean a splendid victory and possession of all Southwestern
Missouri to one party or the other. The Federal scouts also reported
that a large force of State Guards was marching to the assistance of
Gen. Price from toward Sarcoxie. Accordingly, after a conference with
his officers, Sweeney, Sigel, and Majors Sturgis, Schofield, Shepherd,
and Conant, and the artillery captains, Totten and Schaeffer, Gen. Lyon
countermarched his army and returned to Springfield, coming this time
directly to the town, where he arrived August 5th. The main body of the
army camped about the town. Nearly 2,000 of the volunteers and regulars
under Lt. Col. Andrews, of the 1st Missouri, and Maj. Sturgis were
stationed out about four miles from town. Two days later this force was
withdrawn to the line of defence around the town.

A vigilant guard was at once set upon all roads and avenues of approach
to Springfield. No one was allowed to _go out_, except physicians,
although everybody was admitted. Never, perhaps, in the history of war
was a camp so well guarded, and all knowledge of its character kept so
well from the enemy as was Gen. Lyon’s at Springfield.

Col. Thos. L. Snead, now of New York City, and Gen. Price’s assistant
adjutant general in 1861, has kindly furnished much very valuable
information to the writer hereof, and through this volume to the world
at large. The colonel’s means of knowledge are very superior, and he has
manifested the utmost willingness to impart what he knows concerning the
memorable days of July and August, 1861.

Col. Snead says that on Sunday morning, August 4th (1861), Gen. Price
and he rode over to Gen. McCulloch’s headquarters, at McCulloch’s farm,
and in the presence of Snead and Col. James McIntosh, who was
McCulloch’s adjutant general, Gen. Price urged McCulloch to co-operate
with him in an attack on Lyon, who was supposed to be in the immediate
front,—it not then being known to the Confederates that he had
retreated. McCulloch had no faith in Price’s skill as an officer, and a
profound contempt for the Missouri officers generally,—and for Gen.
Rains particularly.[1]

Gen. Price was a major-general of Missouri militia, McCulloch only a
Confederate brigadier. Price had a loud voice and a positive address,
and always spoke to McCulloch as if the latter were his inferior. “Do
you mean to march on and attack Lyon, Gen. McCulloch?” he demanded. “I
have not received orders yet to do so, sir,” answered McCulloch; “my
instructions leave me in doubt whether I will be justified in doing so.”
“Now, sir,” said Price, still in his loud, imperious tone, “I have
commanded in more battles than you ever saw, Gen. McCulloch. I have
three times as many troops as you. I am of higher rank than you are, and
I am twenty years your senior in age and general experience. I waive all
these considerations, Gen. McCulloch, and if you will march upon the
enemy I will obey your orders, and give you the whole command and all
the glory to be won there!” McCulloch said he was then expecting a
dispatch from President Davis, and would take Gen. Price at his word if
it should be favorable, and if after consultation with Gen. Pearce the
latter should agree also to co-operate, Gen. Pearce having an
independent command of Arkansas State troops.

Gen. Price immediately called his general officers together and told
them what he had done. They were at first violently opposed to his
action, but finally they gave their unwilling consent to what they
considered an unnecessary self-abasement. In the afternoon McCulloch and
McIntosh came to Price’s headquarters, and McCulloch announced that he
had received from Richmond, since morning, dispatches that gave him
greater freedom of action and also that he would receive that night
1,000 reinforcements (Greer’s Texas regiment), and that he would
therefore accede to Gen. Price’s proposition and assume command of the
combined armies and march against Gen. Lyon. Accordingly Col. Snead
wrote, by Gen. Price’s direction, the necessary orders and had them
published to the Missouri State Guard. It having been learned that the
Federals were retreating, orders were given to move that very night.
Lyon had, however, escaped, “and,” says Col. Snead, “this was fortunate
for us, perhaps.”


  THE SOUTHERN FORCES UNDER PRICE AND M’CULLOCH ENTER GREENE COUNTY—A
                         GREAT BATTLE IMMINENT.

When Gen. Rains’ troops were driven from the field at Dug Springs, they
fell back on the main army under Price and McCulloch, some five miles
away, and reported that the force which had assailed them was not only
vastly superior to their own, but was much larger and more formidable
than the combined Southern army. It was evident that Gen. Rains, if not
badly whipped, was badly frightened. The Confederates and Missourians
were then encamped on Crane Creek, in the northern part of Stone county.

Thereupon there was confusion among the principal Southern officers.
General McCulloch counselled a retreat and General Price advocated a
forward movement. Price’s officers and men agreed with him and were
“eager for the fray.” As McCulloch was unwilling to advance, General
Price asked him to loan him some arms for the destitute portion of his
command, that the Missourians might advance by themselves. McCulloch at
first refused; afterwards 800 muskets were furnished the Missourians.
The embarrassing disagreement continued till in the evening of Sunday,
August 4, when an order was received by McCulloch from the Confederate
authorities ordering what Price much desired—an advance on General Lyon.
A council was at once held, at which McCulloch agreed to march on
Springfield provided he was granted the chief command of the
consolidated army. Price, to whom in right and justice the supreme
command belonged, anxious to encounter the Federals and defeat and drive
them from the State before they could be reinforced by Fremont from St.
Louis, consented to the terms of the imperious Texas ranger, saying: “I
 am not fighting for distinction, but for the liberties of my country,
and I am willing to surrender not only my command but my life, if
necessary, as a sacrifice to the cause.” A little after midnight,
therefore, on Sunday, August 4, the Southern camp was broken up and the
troops took up the line of march, which was continued slowly and
cautiously, along the Fayetteville road to the crossing of Wilson’s
Creek, near the Christian county line, in sections 25 and 26, tp. 28,
range 23, ten miles southwest of Springfield, which locality was reached
on the 6th.




                              CHAPTER II.
       THE BATTLE OF WILSON’S CREEK—THE UNION OR FEDERAL ACCOUNT.


Gen. Lyon in Springfield—His entreaties to Gen. Fremont for
      Reinforcements—Lyon Loses His Temper—Preliminaries to the Final
      Conflict—Slight Skirmishes—Proposals to Retreat—Gen. Sweeney
      Opposed—A False Alarm—Thursday, August 8th—Friday, August 9th—A
      Messenger from Fremont—No Hope—Lyon’s Last Letter—Confederate
      Military Movements—Failure to Discover or Develop the Federal
      Position—McCulloch Reconnoiters in Person—Price Loses His
      Patience—An Advance Ordered on Springfield—Gen. Lyon Marches Out
      to Battle—Order of March, List of Regiments and Battalions,
      etc.—The March Begun—Lyon’s Route—“Gay and Happy.”—Col. Sigel’s
      Advance and Route—Preparations in Springfield for Retreat—Great
      Excitement Among the Citizens—The Federals in Position Waiting for
      the Dawn—Lyon Opens the battle—Temporary Success of the
      Federals—Desperate Fighting on Both Sides—Death of Gen. Lyon—Full
      Particulars—Still the Battle Goes On—Nearing the End—The Last
      Grand Charge of Price’s Men—The Federals Retreat—Sigel’s Part in
      the Fight—Surprise of the Confederate Camp—Moving Forward—All
      Successful So Far—In Position—A Force Seen Approaching Down the
      Valley—“They Are Friends”—“Ah! They Shoot Against Us; They Make a
      Mistake”—“No! They Are Enemies!”—Charge of the Louisiana
      Regiment—The Federals Retreat with Precipitation and in
      Confusion—Destruction of Sigel’s Force—Sigel Himself Escapes,
      “With Two Dutch Guards and Nary Gun”—Lieut. Farrand’s
      Account—Surgeon Melcher’s Account—Sigel’s Explanation—Capt. Carr’s
      Account.


                       GEN. LYON IN SPRINGFIELD.

When Gen. Lyon returned to Springfield after the Dug Springs expedition,
he scattered his forces upon the different roads leading into the city
at a distance of from three to five miles. Five miles from town, on the
Fayetteville road, was a force of 2,500 under command of Maj. Sturgis.
The other roads were well guarded, and all precautions were taken
against a surprise or a sudden attack. Gen. Lyon’s private room and
personal headquarters were in a house on North Jefferson street, not far
from the public square. The building, a small one, was then owned by
Mrs. Boren; it is now (1883) the property of Mrs. Timmons. His general
headquarters were on the north side of College street, a little west of
Main, in a house then owned by John S. Phelps, but which had been
recently occupied by Maj. Dorn. In this same house his body lay, after
it was borne from the battle field of Wilson’s Creek. The house was
burned by Curtis’ Federals in February, 1862, and where it once stood is
now (July, 1883) a vacant lot, on which are the remains of an old
cellar.

As soon as Lyon reached Springfield he again sent off a courier to
Fremont at St. Louis asking for reinforcements. Hon. John S. Phelps, who
had started for Washington City to attend the extra session of Congress
convened by President Lincoln, had stopped in St. Louis, called upon
Gen. Fremont, and urged him to help Lyon and the Union people of
Southwest Missouri with men and supplies, both of which were at St.
Louis in abundance.[2] But Fremont stated that he did not believe Gen.
Lyon was in anything like desperate straits; that McCulloch and Price
could have nothing but an inconsiderable force, since the country in
Southwestern Missouri was too poor to support a force of any formidable
strength; that in his opinion Lyon could take care of himself; and
finally that he had no troops to spare him anyhow, as he had received
information through Gov. Morton, of Indiana, that a large Confederate
force and flotilla of gunboats, under command of Gen. Pillow, were
coming up the Mississippi to attack Cairo, Bird’s Point, and if
successful in their destruction, would come on and destroy St. Louis,
and that he had need of every available man to guard those threatened
points.

Gen. Lyon consulted with his officers and with the prominent Union men
of Springfield very freely. He knew the situation perfectly. His scouts
came in every day from McCulloch’s army and gave him all needed
information. He was impatient to fight the force in his front, but he
anxiously desired reinforcements to enable him to have a reasonable
chance of success. Every day he visited the out-posts and nearly every
day sent off messages for help. Sometimes he would lose his temper and
curse and swear quite violently. On one occasion he received a message
from Fremont that no more troops could or would be sent for the present.
Striding back and forth in his room, with the paper in his hand, he
suddenly threw it on the table, and smiting his hands together cried
out: “_G—d d—n General Fremont_: He is a worse enemy to me and the Union
cause than Price and McCulloch and the whole d—d tribe of rebels in this
part of the State!”[3]


                  PRELIMINARIES OF THE FINAL STRUGGLE.

On Monday, August 5, the day of Lyon’s arrival at Springfield, as before
stated, he left a force of 2,500 strong at a point about five miles from
Springfield, on the Fayetteville road. This force (comprising fully
one-third of Lyon’s army), under Major Sturgis, was ordered by Gen. Lyon
to be ready to move at a moment’s notice, and at about 6 o’clock on the
evening of the next day the men were in ranks, the artillery horses
harnessed, and everything in readiness to march back and attack the
advancing enemy.

Shortly afterward a stream of visitors, messengers, and communications
poured in upon the general, some reporting the engagement of Capt.
Stockton, of the 1st Kansas, and two companies of Home Guards with a
party of Price’s cavalry, on the prairie west of town, in which two of
the latter were wounded; some gave other information; some were the
bearers of excellent advice(!); others came for orders; still others had
no business.

Two companies were ordered to the relief of Capt. Stockton. Eight
companies of the 1st Kansas infantry, a part of the second Kansas, and
Major Osterhaus’ battalion of the 2d Missouri were ordered to a certain
point in town to await the arrival of Gen. Lyon, who, it seems, was so
entirely occupied with other matters that instead of starting at 10
o’clock, it was midnight when he left his headquarters, and without
looking at his watch he proceeded to Camp Hunter, having already ordered
Major Sturgis to drive in the enemy’s pickets, if within two miles of
his own. A company of cavalry under Capt. Fred Steele[4] was dispatched
on his errand (to find the pickets) at half-past 12, and Gen. Lyon, with
the troops above mentioned, arrived at 3 o’clock in the morning. Here he
consulted his watch, and, finding the time more than two hours later
than he supposed, he at once called together his principal officers,
communicated to them his embarrassing position, and taking their advice,
withdrew the entire force to Springfield.

It had been Lyon’s intention, on retreating from Dug Springs to
Springfield, to wheel suddenly about on reaching the latter place and
march back upon Price and McCulloch (who, he considered, would be
following him up), fall upon them when they least expected an attack,
and defeat them if possible. On arriving at Springfield, appearances
indicated the approach of a Confederate force from the west, and this
caused him to wait a few hours. The night of the 6th, his information
was to the effect that Price and McCulloch were only seven miles away
from Sturgis’ camp, and he intended attacking them at daylight. On the
return to town the general remarked to Major Schofield, of the 1st
Missouri (Frank Blair’s regiment), that he had a premonition that a
night attack would prove disastrous, and yet he had felt impelled to try
it once, and perhaps should do so again, “for my only hope of success is
in a surprise,” he added. Before the Federals reached Springfield it was
daylight. An ambush was formed in the timber southwest of town in case
of pursuit.

During Wednesday continued alarms were circulated in Springfield, and a
real panic prevailed among many of the citizens, who packed up and left,
or prepared to leave, for supposed places of safety. The troops wore
under arms in every quarter, and several times it was reported that
fighting had actually commenced. Toward night the panic in a degree
subsided: but many of the people who remained did not retire or make any
attempt to sleep. Phelps’ regiment of Home Guards, commanded by Col.
Marcus Boyd, was on the _qui vive_ the whole night.

A consultation of the principal Federal officers was held at Gen. Lyon’s
headquarters, which lasted till midnight. The question of evacuating
Springfield and abandoning Southwest Missouri to its fate was seriously
discussed. Looking at the matter from a military point of view, there
was no doubt of the propriety and even the necessity of such a step, and
Gen. Lyon and the majority of his officers counseled such a movement.
Some favored a retreat to Fort Scott, while others thought Rolla a point
easier reached and promising better results.

Gen. Sweeney, however, was strongly opposed to retreating without a
fight. With his naturally florid face flushed to livid red, and waving
his one arm with excitement, he exclaimed vehemently against such a
policy—pointing out the disastrous results which must ensue upon a
retreat without a battle—how the “rebels” would boast over such an easy
conquest, how they would terrorize, harass, and persecute the
unprotected Unionists if given undisputed possession of the country, how
the Unionists themselves would become discouraged, crushed, or
estranged, and declared himself in favor of holding on to the last
moment, and of giving battle to Price and McCulloch as soon as they
should offer it.[5]

Gen. Lyon and some of the other officers became converts to Gen.
Sweeney’s views, and it was decided to remain, save the reputation of
the little army, hope against hope for reinforcements, and not evacuate
Springfield and Greene county until compelled to. The next day when
Sigel’s brigade quartermaster, Major Alexis Mudd, asked Gen. Lyon when
the army would leave Springfield, the latter replied: “Not until we are
whipped out.”


                             A FALSE ALARM.

Thursday morning, Price and McCulloch were reported to be actually
advancing on Springfield. Lyon’s troops were quickly in line of battle,
the luggage wagons were all sent to the center of the town, and in this
position they remained during nearly the entire day. The Southern troops
_had_ advanced, but only about two miles, and had gone into camp in the
southern part of this county, nearly on the line between Greene and
Christian counties (in sections 25 and 36, tp. 28, range 23, partly in
Greene and partly in Christian county), their tents being on either side
of Wilson’s Creek, and extending a mile or so east and south of the
Fayetteville road. Thursday evening the Federals were ready for marching
orders, but a portion of the Kansas troops had been so much engaged the
night before as to be really unfit for service, and an order for all of
the soldiers, except those actually on guard, to retire and rest, was
issued, and the night attack was again deferred. The Home Guards were on
duty and in active service in the city at this time.

And so the soldiers lay down to rest and to sleep—to many of them it was
to be the last repose they should take until they should lie down to
take their last sleep. Soon the camps were wrapped in silence and
slumber and no sound was to be heard save the cry of the night birds and
the challenges of the watchful pickets as they hailed the relief guard,
or arrested the steps of some belated wanderer. There they lay, these
men from Iowa and Kansas, dreaming of the homes and loved ones they had
left behind them on the beautiful prairies of their own States, and in
vision seeing faces and forms and scenes they were destined to never see
again in reality. There they lay, these bearded Germans from St. Louis,
dreaming, perhaps, of families and kinsmen in the city by the great
river, or of their early homes in the Fatherland, far across the deep,
blue sea. There they lay, these Missouri Unionists, sleeping as
peacefully as their brethren in arms.

There they lay, too, only a few miles away, those men under the folds of
the new flag, who had come out from their homes by the bayous of
Louisiana, on the plains of Texas, amid the hills and dales and valleys
of Arkansas and Missouri, to do battle for the cause they believed to be
just and righteous, to drive out those whom they believed to be the
wrongful invaders of their country, the despoilers of their homes. And
to blue and gray alike, with an equal peace and softness, came that
balmy blessing which “knits up the raveled sleeve of care.”

Friday, the 9th, Springfield was remarkably quiet. But the calm preceded
the storm. Those timid creatures who had made it a business to repeat
exciting rumors had been frightened away with much of the material upon
which they operated. Enlistments in the Springfield regiment had been
rapid, and really among the uninitiated and uninformed a feeling of
security prevailed. During the afternoon, Capt. Wood’s company of Kansas
cavalry and Capt. Stanley’s company of regulars had a skirmish with a
scouting party of Price’s cavalry on the prairie about five miles west
of town, defeating them, wounding two and capturing six or eight
prisoners. From the prisoners, among other information, it was learned
that the Southern troops were badly off for provisions and were forced
to do some pretty liberal foraging on both friends and enemies.


                   A MESSENGER FROM FREMONT—NO HOPE!

About noon there arrived a messenger from St. Louis and Fremont bearing
a dispatch from the latter to Gen. Lyon. This dispatch informed Lyon
that his situation was not considered critical; that he doubtless
over-estimated the force in his front; that he ought not to fall back
without good cause, and assured him that no reinforcement would be sent,
but that he must report his future movements as soon as possible, and do
the best he could.

Like the brave, disciplined soldier that he was, Lyon accepted the
situation, and prepared to obey the orders of his superior officer. With
Fremont’s message before him, he sat quietly down at his little table in
his headquarters and wrote the following reply with his own hand—the
last letter he ever wrote:—

                                         Springfield, Mo., Aug. 9, 1861.

  General—I have just received your note of the 6th inst., by special
  messenger. I retired to this place, as I have before informed you,
  reaching here on the 5th. The enemy followed to within ten miles of
  here. He has taken a strong position, and is recruiting his supplies
  of horses, mules, and provisions by forages into the surrounding
  country. His large force of mounted men enables him to do this without
  much annoyance from me. I find my position extremely embarrassing, and
  am at present unable to determine whether I shall be able to maintain
  my ground or forced to retire. I shall hold my ground as long as
  possible, though I may, without knowing how far, endanger the safety
  of my entire force with its valuable material, being induced, by the
  important considerations involved, to take this step. The enemy
  yesterday made a show of force about five miles distant, and has
  doubtless a full purpose of making an attack on me. Very respectfully,
  your obedient servant,

                                                                 N. Lyon
                                           Brig. Gen. Vols., Commanding.

  To Major Gen. J. C. Fremont, Commanding Western Department, St. Louis,
  Mo.

No word of complaint; no murmuring; but with the expressed knowledge
that he was to be attacked, when attack meant defeat, he calmly
announced his determination to hold his ground as “long as possible.”


          CONFEDERATE MILITARY MOVEMENTS PRECEDING THE BATTLE.

From their camp at Moody’s Spring, where they had arrived Monday night,
Generals Price and McCulloch moved forward to the point on Wilson’s
creek, heretofore described, and went again into camp on the 6th.
Scouting parties were at once sent out, especially to discover the
Federal position, but with little success, while foraging parties
scoured the country in every direction, and were equally inefficient in
obtaining information. The combined forces were at once put in position
to advance on Springfield, and only awaited the decision of Gen.
McCulloch to begin to move. The latter was irresolute and undecided for
some days. From the information he possessed as to the strength and
character of Lyon’s forces and his knowledge of his own, he was fearful
of the result of an engagement at that time. He had but little
confidence in Price’s Missourians, who were somewhat undisciplined and
inexperienced, it is true, and at one time he characterized them as
“splendid roasting-ear foragers, but poor soldiers.”

It is an undoubted fact that at one time Gen. McCulloch had decided _to
retreat into Arkansas_. Gen. Price, however, was anxious for an
immediate advance and attack. He knew that Lyon’s force was inferior
even to his own, and that the entire Southern army had but little to
risk in offering battle. He knew furthermore, that Lyon ought to be
reinforced, and that the chances were that he could and would be, and of
course it was desirable that the enemy be attacked before this
reinforcement should be effected. The most serious feature considered by
McCulloch, that the Missourians were illy disciplined, imperfectly
organized, and poorly armed, Price thought would be overcome by their
superiority in numbers and _their pluck_ in fighting on Missouri soil
against a detested enemy—“the Yankee Dutch.”

There remains to be shown a good reason why McCulloch did not follow up
Lyon and attack him on the 6th; it is true that he gained a victory by
waiting, but that victory could have been won four days earlier and made
more complete, more decisive and more lasting in its results. And yet
McCulloch, on the 8th, seriously meditated a retreat—knowing his enemy’s
strength as well as his own, and understanding, or supposed to
understand, the situation perfectly.

In his report to the Confederate Secretary of War (see Rebellion
Records, Series I., Vol. III., p. 745), Gen. McCulloch says: “* * * I
asked of the Missourians, owing to their knowledge of the country, some
reliable information of the strength and position of the enemy. This
they repeatedly promised, but totally failed to furnish, though to urge
them to it I then and at subsequent periods _declared I would order the
whole army back to Cassville_, rather than bring on an engagement with
an unknown enemy. It had no effect, as _we remained four days within ten
miles of Springfield, and never learned whether the streets were
barricaded, or if any kind of works of defense had been erected by the
enemy_.”

Col. Snead says that McCulloch made every effort to discover the
condition of Springfield; that he (McCulloch) would frequently sling his
rifle over his shoulder, mount his horse and reconnoiter in person; but
all to no purpose. Incredible as it may seem, it could not even be
ascertained whether or not the Federals had thrown up breastworks, which
it might be supposed could be learned from inspection a mile away.

Gen. N. B. Pearce says the first information concerning Gen. Lyon’s
condition was furnished by two ladies, who, “on a pass to go out of
Lyon’s lines, came around by Pond Springs, and came to Gen. Price’s
headquarters and gave the desired information.” No corroboration of this
story has been obtained, but it is given on the high authority of such a
gallant officer and high-minded gentleman as Gen. Pearce, now of
Whitesboro, Texas.

At last, Gen. Price lost all patience, and at sunrise on the morning of
the 9th, sent Col. Snead over to McCulloch, to say to him that if he did
not give orders for an immediate advance he (Price) would resume command
of the Missouri State Guard and advance alone, be the consequences what
they might. This led to a conference of the general officers at Price’s
headquarters that afternoon, which conference resulted in orders for an
advance on Springfield that very night, the movement to begin at nine
o’clock.


                    GEN. LYON MARCHES OUT TO BATTLE.

Upon the receipt of Gen. Fremont’s last message, to the effect that no
help would be sent, Gen. Lyon resolved upon attacking his enemy down on
Wilson’s creek and trusting to the effect of a surprise and a fierce
fight. He was led to this course by the fact that he knew his situation
would not improve with time, and perhaps by his knowledge of the fact
that Price and McCulloch were about to attack _him_.[6] To fight on the
defensive about Springfield, with a town full of women and children
behind him and an open country adapted to the movements of cavalry, of
which he had but a handful, and of which his enemy’s force largely
consisted, could but result one way—in defeat. The Confederates were
expecting to attack, not to be attacked, and if the Federals should fall
suddenly upon them it would disconcert them very materially, to say the
least. These were the tactics adopted by Gen. Lee when Grant crossed the
Rapidan, in the spring of 1864, and by Napoleon, in the first campaign
in Italy.

Accordingly, late in the afternoon of the 9th (Friday) word was sent to
the subordinate commanders that after nightfall another movement against
the Confederates would be made. Between Gens. Lyon and Sweeney, Col.
Sigel, and Maj. Sturgis, the plan of attack was agreed upon. That part
of the plan which arranged for sending Sigel’s brigade around completely
to the south and rear of the Confederate position, was, it is said,
adopted by Gen. Lyon upon the most urgent suggestions and
representations of Col. Sigel himself. The army was to be divided into
two columns. The first column, under Lyon, was to consist of three small
brigades, the second under Sigel, was to consist of one small brigade
composed of two regiments of infantry, two companies of cavalry, and six
pieces of artillery.

The first brigade of Lyon’s column was composed of three companies of
the 1st U. S. regular infantry, as follows: Co. B, Capt. Gilbert; Co. C,
Capt. Plummer; Co. D, Capt. Huston; a company of regular rifle recruits
under Lieut. Wood,—the four companies being commanded by Capt. Plummer,
of Co. C. Then there were two companies of the 2d Missouri Volunteers,
under Maj. P. J. Osterhaus; Capt. Woods’ company (mounted) of the 2d
Kansas Volunteers; Company B, 1st U. S. regular cavalry, under Lieut.
Caulfield, and a light battery of six pieces commanded by Capt. James
Totton. The first brigade was commanded by Maj. Sturgis.

The second brigade was commanded by Lieut. Col. Geo. L. Andrews, of the
1st Missouri Volunteers (Blair’s regiment), and was composed of the 1st
Missouri infantry; Cos. B and E, 2d U. S. regular infantry, under Capt.
Fred Steele; one company of regular recruits under Lieut. Lothrop; one
company (squad) of mounted recruits under Sergeant Morine, and Lieut.
Dubois’ light battery of four pieces, one a 12-pounder.

The third brigade was commanded by Gen. Sweeney, and was composed of the
1st Iowa volunteers, under Lieut. Col. Merritt, the colonel, J. F.
Bates, being sick in Springfield; the 1st Kansas, under Col. Geo. W.
Deitzler; the 2d Kansas, under Col. Mitchell, and about 200 mounted Dade
county home guards, under Capt. Clark Wright and Capt. T. A. Switzler.

Gen. Sigel’s command consisted of eight companies of the 3d Missouri
volunteers (Sigel’s regiment), under Lieut. Col. Albert; nine companies
of the 5th Missouri, under Col. Salomon; one company, 1st regular
cavalry, under Capt. Carr; one company, C, of the 2d U. S. dragoons,
under Lieut. Farrand, and six pieces of light artillery manned by
details from the infantry recruits under Lieuts. Schaeffer and
Schuetzenbach.


                  THE MARCH BEGUN—ROUTE OF GEN. LYON.

At about 6 P. M. of Friday evening, the 9th, the movement of troops
began. Gen. Lyon’s column went to the westward, on the Mt. Vernon road,
Capt. Gilbert’s company of regular infantry having the advance. In a
short time it was dark, but the march was continued. Although the march
was intended to result in a surprise, and, it was expected, would be
conducted silently, yet there was a great deal of noise made. The Iowa
and Kansas volunteers were disposed to exercise their vocal organs, and
camp songs of all sorts were sung _con spirito_, along the march. The
1st Iowa had a favorite song, the burden of which ran:—

  So let the wide world wag as it will,
  We’ll be gay and happy still.
  Gay and happy, gay and happy,
  We’ll be gay and happy still.

The strains of this song were wafted out over the prairie, loud enough,
it would have seemed, to have been heard by McCulloch’s pickets, if any
were out. The Kansas men sang the “Happy Land of Canaan,” and raised the
neighborhood with their vocal efforts. Toward midnight, however, the
line became more quiet, by Gen. Lyon’s orders. The latter had remarked
during the march that the Iowa troops had too much levity in their
composition to do good fighting, but added that he would give them an
opportunity to show what they were made of. It so turned out that the
general was mistaken in his estimate of the fighting qualities of the
Hawkeyes.

Lyon marched west from Springfield on the Mt. Vernon road, about five
miles, or a little east of where the town of Brooklyn now stands, when
he turned south, and made his way over neighboring roads and across
prairies as best he could nearly six miles, when he reached a point
within striking distance of Price’s Missourians. The center of the camp
of the Southerners was about six miles west, and about seven miles south
of the public square of Springfield. Gen. Lyon had for guides Pleasant
Hart, Parker Cox, and other men. Nearly twenty men have come forward to
claim this distinction.

It was 1 o’clock in the morning when the advance discovered the
camp-fires of the Missourians. The command was then halted, and the
ground reconnoitered as well as possible until the dawn of day, when it
again moved forward and formed a battle line, moving a little southeast
so as to strike the extreme northern point of the enemy’s camp.


                         COL. SIGEL’S ADVANCE.

Sigel left “Camp Fremont,” on the south side of Springfield, at about
6:30, p. m., taking at first the “wire” road, or road to Cassville and
Fayetteville, along which the telegraph wire ran. About four miles
southwest of town, the command left the main Cassville road, which led
directly through McCulloch’s camp, and bore south, and then along a road
parallel with the Cassville road, and in the same general direction,
until below the Christian county line. Col. Sigel had for guides, C. B.
Owen, John Steele, Andrew Adams, Sam (or Jo.) Carthal and L. A. D.
Crenshaw. Sigel’s column marched perhaps twelve or thirteen miles,
passing clear around the extreme southeastern camp of the enemy, and
arriving at daylight within a mile of the main camp. Taking forward the
two cavalry companies of Carr and Farrand, Col. Sigel contrived to cut
off about forty men of McCulloch’s troops, who had gone out early to
forage, and were engaged in digging potatoes, picking roasting ears,
gathering tomatoes and procuring other supplies for their individual
commissary departments. These captures were made in such a manner that
no news of the Federal advance from this quarter was brought into the
Confederate camp. Moving cautiously up, Sigel planted four pieces of his
artillery on a little hill, in plain view of the Confederate tents,
which spread out to his front and right. The two regiments of infantry
advanced so as to command the Fayetteville road at the point where it
crosses Wilson’s creek, while the two companies of cavalry guarded the
flanks. In this position the command rested, awaiting the sound of
Lyon’s gun as a signal to open the ball. The prisoners were left in
charge of Capt. Flagg, with his company (K) of the 5th Missouri.

In conformity to the plan agreed upon between the Federal commanders,
Sigel disposed his troops so as to command the Fayetteville road, and
prevent the Confederates from retreating by that thoroughfare. It is
claimed by officers of both armies that, had an avenue of retreat been
left open, it is highly probable that the result of the day’s battle
would have been different.

Lyon had left behind him the Greene and Christian County Home Guards to
take care of Springfield, directing the officers in command to watch the
Fayetteville road below where Sigel turned off, and send word to him
across the country, should the Confederates be found approaching from
that quarter. This is a circumstance corroborative of the theory that
Lyon knew that the Confederates meditated a night attack on him (as they
did) or believed that such was a fact. Everything in Springfield had
been gotten ready for a retreat. Wagons were loaded, and the funds of
the bank were secured for transfer, and were being guarded by the Home
Guards. The citizens were in quite a state, to be sure.


                         LYON OPENS THE BATTLE.

In describing the battle of Wilson’s Creek in this history, which, it is
believed, contains the only fully elaborate and accurate account ever
published, of that memorable contest, it is proper to do so in detail.
The statements herein made have been derived from the official reports
of commanders, and from the fairest accounts of actual participants.
Care has been taken to discard all reports which are highly colored,
sensational, not corroborated by undisputed facts, and savoring of the
improbable. Both Federal and Confederate accounts of this character have
been rejected. The Federal accounts believed to be the most reliable are
those furnished by Maj. (General) Sturgis, Lieut. Col. Merritt of the
1st Iowa; Lieut. Col. Blair and Maj. Cloud, of the 2d Kansas; Maj. J. M.
Schofield, then of the 1st Missouri; Capt. Totten and Lieut. Dubois of
the artillery, and Capt. Steele of the regulars; Capt. Wright of the
Home Guards, all of Lyon’s column; and Gen. Sigel, Dr. S. H. Melcher,
the guides, and Capt. Carr, of Sigel’s column. The Confederate or
Southern accounts relied upon, are the official reports of Gens. Price,
McCulloch, Pearce, Clark, Rains, McBride and Parsons; reports of Col.
John T. Hughes, of Slack’s division, and Col. John R. Graves, of Rains’
division; letters from Col. Thos. L. Snead, Asst. Adj. Gen. of Gen.
Price, and Lieut. W. P. Barlow, of Guibor’s battery; reports of and
letters from Col. T. J. Churchill, 1st Arkansas Mounted Riflemen; Col.
James McIntosh, and Lieut. Col. B. T. Embry, 2d Arkansas Mounted
Riflemen; Lieut. Col. D. McRae, of McRae’s battalion, Arkansas
Volunteers; Col. Lewis Hebert, Lieut. Col. S. M. Hyams and Maj. W. F.
Tunnard, 3d Louisiana Volunteers; Col. E. Greer, South Kansas-Texas
Regiment Cavalry; Capt. J. G. Reid, of Reid’s Arkansas Battery; Col.
John R. Gratiot, 3d Arkansas; Col. J. D. Walker, 4th Arkansas; Col. Tom
P. Dockery, 5th Arkansas Infantry; Col. De Rosey Carroll, 1st Arkansas
Cavalry, and other commissioned officers, and many private soldiers and
a few citizens.

Maj. Sturgis, who assumed command of Lyon’s column after the battle,
states that at daylight, Lyon’s battle line was formed, the infantry in
front, closely followed by Totten’s battery, which was supported by a
reserve. In this order the line advanced but a few hundred yards, when
the first outpost of Price’s men was encountered. Firing was commenced
instantly, and the outpost hurriedly retreated. This was the advance of
Rains’ division. The Federal line then halted, and Capt. Plummer’s
battalion of regulars, with the Dade County Home Guards on his left, was
sent to the east across Wilson’s creek, and ordered to move toward the
front, keeping pace with the advance on the Federal left. The main line
then swept forward, and after crossing a considerable ravine and
ascending a high ridge, a full view of a line of Rains’ skirmishers was
had. Maj. Osterhaus’ two companies of the 2d Missouri, and two companies
of the 1st Missouri, under Capts. Yates and John S. Cavender, were
deployed to the left, all as skirmishers. Firing between the two
skirmish lines now became very severe, and Totten’s battery, then in
position, opened with shell, and the boom of the cannon and the crashing
of the bombs added to the excitement.[7]

The 1st Missouri, Col. Andrews, and the 1st Kansas, Col. Dietzler, were
now hastily moved to the front, supported by Totten’s battery; the 2d
Kansas, Col. Mitchell, Steele’s battalion, and Dubois’ battery, were
held in reserve. The 1st Missouri took its position in front, upon the
crest of a small elevated plateau. The 1st Kansas went to the left of
the 1st Missouri, while Totten’s battery was placed opposite the
interval between the two regiments. Osterhaus’ two companies occupied
the extreme right, with their right resting on a ravine, which turned
abruptly to the right and rear. Dubois’ battery, supported by Steele’s
battalion, was placed seventy-five yards to the left and rear of
Totten’s guns, so as to bear upon a well-served Confederate battery
(believed to have been Capt. Woodruff’s “Pulaski Artillery,” of
Arkansas), which had come into position to the left and front on the
opposite side of Wilson’s Creek, and was sweeping with canister the
entire plateau upon which the Federals were posted.

The Missourians now rallied in considerable force under cover at the
foot of the slope and along it in front and opposite the Federal right,
toward the crest of the main ridge running parallel to the creek. During
this time Plummer’s battalion had advanced along the ridge about 500
yards to the left of the main Federal position, and had reached the
terminus of this ridge, when he found his further progress arrested by a
force of infantry (a portion of McCulloch’s division), which was
occupying a cornfield (Mr. Ray’s) in the valley. At this moment the
“bang” of a cannon was heard more than a mile to the south, at about the
point where Sigel was supposed to be. This fire was apparently answered
from the opposite side of the valley, at a still greater distance, the
line of fire of the two batteries being apparently east and west, and
nearly perpendicular to Totten’s and Dubois’ batteries. After about ten
or twelve shots this firing ceased, and nothing more was heard of Sigel
until about 8:30, when a brisk cannonading was heard for a few minutes,
about a mile to the right of that heard before, and still further to the
rear.

Early in the engagement the 1st Iowa had been brought up from the
reserve to the front, and immediately became hotly engaged, doing good
fighting and winning the praise of Gen. Lyon, who thought at one time
that men who sang rollicking songs would not fight well.

The entire Federal line was now successfully advanced with much energy,
and apparently with every prospect of success. The firing, which had
been spirited for half an hour, now increased to a continuous roar,
heard miles away—in Springfield, plainly. Capt. Totten’s battery came
into action by section and by piece, as the nature of the ground would
admit, it being wooded, with much black-jack undergrowth, and played
vigorously upon the Confederate lines with considerable effect.

More desperate fighting was not done during the civil war. The men of
the West were fighting. For fully half an hour the armies fought over
the hill before described—“Bloody Hill,” it was afterward called. The
1st Kansas gave way and went to the rear, but the 1st Iowa promptly took
its place, and the fighting went on. Back and forth over the ground they
went. Now the Union troops fell back a few yards, then advanced again
and drove the secession troops a short distance, then the latter
advanced, and so it was for half an hour. At last the Federals were left
in possession of the ground for a short time, the Confederates falling
back and reforming.

Meantime Plummer’s battalion on the Federal left had encountered
McIntosh’s regiment of Arkansas riflemen, and Hebert’s 3d Louisiana
regiment, in Ray’s cornfield and been driven back with considerable
loss. The Arkansas and Louisiana regiments both belonged to McCulloch’s
army. They would have annihilated Plummer almost, but just as they were
preparing to do so Dubois’ battery opened with shells, filling the
cornfield full of them, and making it untenable for any troops, and the
two regiments retreated in some disorder. Steele’s battalion was
supporting Dubois’ battery on this occasion. Plummer was severely
wounded.

Just now there was a momentary cessation of firing, the advantage being
with the Federals, and it became apparent that some of the Southerners
desired to retreat, but they soon learned that they were practically
surrounded, for there was no road to the east or the west, and the only
outlet from their position, the Fayetteville road, was held by Sigel.
The only way therefore to get out was to fight out. Quite a number of
the Missourians were in confusion. Their horses were frightened and
became uncontrollable, and the men galloped about aimlessly, and wildly.
Some of them got away from the battle field and rode away to Cassville
panic-stricken and reporting that Gen. Price’s army had been “all cut to
pieces” by an overwhelming force of Federals! The greater portion of
Lyon’s line was quiet for a time, and some thought the victory had been
won.

Along the right of the Federal line, however, the 1st Missouri was hotly
engaged with McBride’s division of Missourians and was about to be
overcome. Lyon hurried the 2d Kansas to its relief and saved it. During
the temporary lull in the firing the Federal line was reformed under the
direction of Lyon himself. Steele’s battalion, which had been supporting
Dubois’ guns, was brought forward to the support of Totten’s, and
preparations were made to withstand another attack, which, as could be
ascertained by the shouts of the enemy’s officers, plainly audible, was
being organized.

Scarcely had Lyon disposed his men to receive the attack when his enemy
again appeared with a very large force along his entire front and moving
toward his flanks as well. At once the firing again began and for a time
was inconceivably fierce along the entire line. The Confederates were in
three lines _in some places_ the front line lying down, the second
kneeling, the third line standing, and all the lines and every man
loading and firing as rapidly as possible. Every available Federal
battalion was now brought into action, and the battle raged with great
fury for an hour, the scales seeming all the time nearly equally
balanced, sometimes the Federal troops and then the Confederates gaining
ground and then losing it, while all of the time some of the best blood
in the land was being spilled as recklessly as if it were ditch-water.

How they did fight, these men of both armies!—fought until their
gun-barrels became so hot they could scarcely hold them—fought when
their leaders fell and without commands—fought when the blood and brains
of their comrades were spattered into their faces—fought, many of them,
until they died. By and by, as the Confederate fire never slackened, but
was constantly increased by the arrival of reinforcements, and as some
of the Federals reported that their cartridges had given out,
detachments of the latter began to give way, and Gen. Sweeney and Gen.
Lyon were engaged from time to time in bringing them back into the
fight.


                          DEATH OF GEN. LYON.

Early in this engagement, while Gen. Lyon was walking and leading his
horse along the line on the left of Totten’s battery, his horse, the
iron gray, was killed and he was wounded in two places, in the head and
in the leg. Captain Herron, of the 1st Iowa,[8] states that he saw the
horse fall, and that the animal sank down as if vitally struck, neither
plunging nor rearing. Lyon then walked on, waving his sword and
hallooing. He was limping for he had been wounded in the leg. He carried
his hat, a drab felt, in his hand and looked white and dazed. Suddenly
blood appeared on the side of his head and began to run down his cheek.
He stood a moment and then walked slowly to the rear. Capt. Herron
states that he was within twenty feet of Lyon when this happened, near
enough to observe that he was wearing his old uniform, that of captain
in the regular army.

When he reached a position a little in the rear Lyon sat down and an
officer bound a handkerchief about his wounded head. He remarked
despondingly to Maj. Schofield, of Blair’s regiment, one of his staff:
“It is as I expected; I am afraid the day is lost.” The Major replied:
“O, no, General; let us try once more.” Major Sturgis then dismounted
one of his own orderlies and offered the horse to Lyon, who at first
declined the animal, saying: “I do not need a horse.” He then stood up
and ordered Sturgis to rally a portion of the 1st Iowa which had broken.
Sturgis, in executing this order, went to some distance from his
general. The 1st Iowa was being ordered forward by a staff officer, when
some of the men called out, “We have no leader,” “Give us a leader,
then,” etc. Lyon immediately asked to be helped on the orderly’s horse.
As he straightened himself in the saddle the blood was dripping off his
heel from his wounded leg. Gen. Sweeney rode up and Lyon spoke quickly
to him, “Sweeney, lead those troops forward (indicating the 1st Iowa)
and we will make one more charge.”

Then, swinging his hat, Lyon called out to the 2d Kansas regiment, “Come
on, my brave boys, (or ‘my bully boys,’ as some say), I will lead you;
_forward_!” He had gone but a few yards when he was shot through the
body. One of his orderlies, a private named Ed. Lehman, of Co. B, 1st U.
S. cavalry, caught him in his arms and lowered him to the ground. With
the breath still feeling at his lips, and his great heart throbbing and
striking his own death-knell, the dying chieftain gasped, “Lehman, I’m
going,” and so passed away his spirit through the battle-clouds to the
realms where is everlasting peace. The place where Lyon fell was
afterward called “Bloody Point.” A heap of stones marks the spot to this
day. Lyon’s body was borne to the rear by Lieut. Schreyer, of Capt.
Tholen’s company of the 2d Kansas, assisted by Lehman and another
soldier.


                       STILL THE BATTLE GOES ON.

In the meantime the disordered Federal line was rallied and reformed.
The 1st Iowa took its place in the front, and Major Sturgis says,
“fought like old veterans.” The Kansans and the Missourians were also
doing well, and the Confederates were driven back, only to come again.
The situation of the Federals was now desperate. The commander, Gen.
Lyon, was killed; Gen. Sweeney was wounded, Col. Deitzler, of the 1st
Kansas, lay with two bullets in his body; Col. Mitchell, of the 2d
Kansas, by the same fire that killed Lyon, was severely wounded (it was
thought at first mortally) and as he was borne from the field called to
an officer of Maj. Sturgis’ staff, “For God’s sake support my regiment;”
Col. Andrews, of the 1st Missouri, and Col. Merritt, of the 1st Iowa,
were wounded; and thus it was that all of the regimental commanders of
Lyon’s column were wounded. Still the battle went on.


                 THE LAST GRAND CHARGE OF PRICE’S MEN.

The great questions in the minds of Sturgis and Sweeney and the other
Federal officers, who had been informed of the plan of attack agreed
upon were, “Where is Sigel? Why doesn’t he co-operate?” Although it
seemed as if there must be a retreat should the Southerners make another
vigorous charge, yet if Sigel should come up with his near 1,000 men,
and make an attack on Price’s right flank and rear, then the Federals
could go forward with strong hopes of success. If Sigel had been
whipped, however, there was nothing left but to retreat.

Maj. Schofield, Lyon’s chief of staff, rode to Sturgis and informed him
that Lyon was killed and Sigel could not be heard from, and moreover,
that the ammunition was about exhausted, some of the troops being
entirely out. Sturgis thereupon assumed command—although only a major at
the time. He at once summoned the principal officers left and consulted
with them. All agreed that unless Sigel made his appearance very soon
there was nothing left but to retreat, if indeed retreat were possible.

The consultation was brought to a close by the advance of a heavy column
of infantry from towards the hill where Sigel’s battery had been heard
at the beginning of the struggle. These troops carried flags which,
drooping about the staffs, much resembled the stars and stripes, and
Sturgis and Schofield say the troops had the appearance of Sigel’s. A
staff officer in front of where the consultation was going on rode back
and called out delightedly “_Yonder comes Sigel! Yonder comes Sigel!_”
and the officers departed, each to his command to arrange for the
expected change in the programme.

On came the moving mass in Sturgis’ front, the soldiers cool and steady
as grenadiers. Down the hill across the hollow in front they swept and
took position along the foot of the ridge on which the Federals were
posted. And now, “they are rebels!” was heard from the more advanced of
the Kansans and Iowans. Suddenly a battery (Guibor’s) which had followed
the line and had reached the hill in front of “Bloody Hill,” wheeled
about, unlimbered and the command “_Fire!_” rang out and the guns
belched forth shrapnel and canister before the trail pieces had hardly
touched the ground. The infantry at the foot of the hill, now began
firing and slowly ascending the hill, and at once commenced the fiercest
and most bloody struggle of all that bloody day.

Lieut. Dubois’ battery, on the Federal left supported by Osterhaus’ two
companies and the rallied fragments of the Missouri 1st, opened on the
new battery (Guibor’s) and soon checked it. Totten’s battery, still in
the Federal center, supported by the Iowans and regulars, seemed to be
the main point of the Confederate attack.

The Missourians frequently came up within twenty feet of the muzzles of
Totten’s guns and received their charges of canister full in their
faces, and the two clouds of battle smoke mingled until they seemed as
one.

For the first time during the day the Federal line never wavered and the
Confederate line never flinched. At one time Capt. Steele’s battalion,
which was some yards in front, together with the left flanks, was in
danger of being overwhelmed and captured, the contending lines standing
so close that the muzzles of their guns almost touched. Capt. Granger,
of Sturgis’ staff, ran to the rear and brought up the supports of
Dubois’ battery, consisting of Osterhaus’ battalion, detachment, of the
1st Missouri, 1st Kansas, and two companies of the 1st Iowa, in quick
time, and took position on the left flank, and poured in a heavy volley
upon the Confederates, which was so murderous and destructive that that
portion of the line gave way. Capts. Patrick E. Burke and Madison
Miller, and Adjutant Hiscock, of the 1st Missouri, were especially
mentioned for gallantry in this assault.

The entire Confederate line now fell back a short distance and began
again forming. Sturgis took advantage of this lull in the storm to make
good his retreat. Perceiving that Totten’s battery and Steele’s
battalion were entirely safe, for the present, and directing Capt.
Totten to replace his disabled horses as soon as possible, Sturgis sent
Dubois’ battery to the rear with its supports to take up a position on
the hill in the rear and cover the retreat. The 2d Kansas, on the
extreme right, having been nearly out of ammunition for some time, was
ordered to withdraw, which it did bringing off its wounded. This,
however, left the Federal right flank exposed, and the Missourians at
that point, to the number of 100 or more, advanced at once; they were
driven back, however, by Steele’s battalion of regulars and joined the
main force reforming in the rear.


                                RETREAT.

Maj. Sturgis gave the order to retreat as soon as his enemy had fallen
back and enabled him to do so. Totten’s battery, as soon as his disabled
horses could be replaced, retired with the main body of the infantry,
while Capt. Steele met the feeble demonstrations of a few plucky
Missouri skirmishers who had not fallen back with the main line and were
picking away at the Federal right flank. The whole Federal column now
moved unmolested and in tolerable order to the high open prairie east of
Ross’ spring and about two miles from the battle ground. The artillery
and the ambulances, were brought off in safety. After making a short
halt on the prairie the retreat was continued to Springfield over
substantially the same route taken to the field.

Just after the order to retire had been given, and while Sturgis was
undecided whether to retreat from the field entirely or take up another
position, one of Sigel’s non-commissioned officers (Sergt. Frœlich)
arrived on a foam-covered horse and reported that Col. Sigel’s brigade
had been totally routed, his artillery captured, and the colonel himself
either killed or taken prisoner.

On reaching the Little York road Sturgis encountered Lieut. Farrand,
with his company of dragoons, one piece of artillery and a considerable
portion of the 3d and 5th Missouri, all of Sigel’s command, which had
made their way across the country in order to unite with the main
command and be saved from entire destruction. The march was resumed, but
the command did not succeed in reaching Springfield until five o’clock
in the evening.

Lyon’s column began the attack at about 5 in the morning and it was
half-past 11 when the battle ended; the main body of the troops were
engaged about six hours.


                       SIGEL’S PART IN THE FIGHT.

It is proper now to consider the part taken by Col. Sigel and his
brigade in the battle of Wilson’s Creek. It has been stated that he had
moved entirely around the southern end of the Confederate line of camp,
and on a previous page we left him with his guns “in battery,” and his
infantry and cavalry in line commanding the Fayetteville road, and ready
to open fire as soon an the sound of Lyon’s guns could be heard up the
valley, nearly two miles.

At 5:30, early in the morning, the rattle of musketry was heard,
apparently nearly two miles away, to the northwest. “_Bang! Bang! Bang!
Bang!_” in rapid succession, went the four guns of Lieuts. Schaeffer and
Schuetzenbach, as they discharged their contents into and among the
tents of McCulloch’s camp. A few more rounds and the Confederates
abandoned their tents and retired in haste toward the northeast and
northwest. This fighting was done just across the line, in Christian
county, on Sharp’s farm, which runs up to the county line, on which
stands Mr. Sharp’s house.

McCulloch’s troops, infantry and cavalry, soon began to form, and Sigel
brought forward his entire line into and across the valley, the two
companies of cavalry to the right, the artillery in the center and the
infantry on the left. After a period of irregular firing for about half
an hour, the Confederates retired into the woods and up the adjoining
hills. The firing toward the northwest was now more distinct, and it was
evident that Gen. Lyon had engaged the enemy along the whole line. To
give assistance to him—to be able to co-operate with him if necessary,
and to drive the enemy in his own front, Sigel again advanced, this time
toward the northwest, intending to attack the Confederates in the rear.

Marching forward, Sigel struck the Cassville road, making his way
through a number of cattle and horses, and arriving at an eminence,
which had been used as a slaughter-yard by McCulloch’s men. This was on
Sharp’s farm and near the house. At and near Sharp’s house, on the road,
some of McCulloch’s men, who were straggling back from the fight in
front, came unawares on Sigel’s men and were taken in. Sigel, after a
brief conference with some of his officers, at once concluded that Lyon
had been successful and was driving the Confederates before him. Knowing
that this was the only avenue of retreat left open, and imagining that
here was a grand opportunity for stopping it up and bagging several
thousand “rebels,” the colonel hurriedly formed his troops across the
road, planting the artillery in the center on the plateau, and a
regiment of infantry, and a company of cavalry on either flank, and
awaited the coming of what seemed to him to be the _vanquished_
Confederates, large numbers of whom could be seen moving toward the
south along the ridge of a hill about 700 yards opposite the right of
the Federal right.

It was now about half-past eight o’clock, and the firing in the
northwest, where Lyon was supposed to be, and where he really was
fighting, had almost entirely ceased. At this instant, Dr. S. H.
Melcher, the assistant surgeon of Salomon’s regiment, and some of the
skirmishers came back from the front, where desultory firing had been
going on, and reported that Lyon’s men were coming up the road, for they
could be seen plainly, and the gray-coated Iowa regiment plainly
distinguished. At once, Lieut. Col. Albert, of the 3d Missouri, and Col.
Salomon, of the 5th, notified their regiments _not to fire_ on the
troops coming in this direction, for they were friends, and Sigel
himself gave the same caution to the artillery.

Everybody was surprised at this unexpected turn of affairs, and the
Germans of Sigel’s and Salmon’s regiments began jabbering away
delightedly, and the color-bearers were beckoning with their flags to
the advancing hosts to “come on”—when, all at once, two batteries of
artillery, one on the Fayetteville road and one on the hill where it was
supposed Lyon’s men were in pursuit of the flying Confederates, opened
with cannister, shell and shrapnel, while the gray-coated troops,
supposed to be the Iowans, advanced from the Fayetteville road and
attacked the Federal right, and a battalion of cavalry made its
appearance, apparently ready and waiting to charge!

The jabbering of the German soldiers was now something wonderful, but it
had a different tone from that of a few minutes previously! It is
impossible to describe the consternation and frightful confusion that
resulted. So surprised and frightened were the soldiers that they could
not understand these were _Confederates_ who were firing upon them and
coming rapidly forward to sweep them from the face of the earth. They
hurried and skurried about crying, some in English: “It is Totten’s
battery!” others in German: “_Sie haben gegen uns geschossen! Sie irrten
sich!_” (They are firing against us! They make a mistake!) And then
making no effort to fight worthy of the name, they began to retreat.

The artillerymen, all of whom were recruits from the infantry, who had
seen but little service of any kind, could hardly be brought forward to
serve their pieces, although directed by Sigel himself; the infantry
would not level their guns until it was too late; indeed, they could not
be made to stop running, let alone to turn and fight. Salomon cursed in
German, in English, in French. Sigel threatened and bullied and coaxed.
No use. As well try to stop a herd of stampeded buffaloes. Lieut.
Farrand, with his company of cavalry brought off one piece of artillery
which had not been unlimbered and put in position, and away it went the
wheels bouncing two feet from the ground and the postilions lashing
their horses like race riders.

On came McCulloch’s and Price’s men, the Louisiana regiment of Col.
Hebert (pronounced Hebare) which had been mistaken for the 1st Iowa
because of its pretty steel gray uniform, was in front, and following
them were the Arkansas regiments of Dockery and Gratiot, the 5th and 3d,
Greer’s regiment of Texas cavalry, Lieut. Col. Major’s Howard and
Chariton county battalion, Johnson’s battalion mounted Missourians, and
some other detachments. Up to the very muzzles of the cannons they came,
killing the artillery horses and what artillerymen were reckless enough
to remain, firing fairly into the faces of the panicky Teutons and
forcing them to throw themselves into the bushes, into by-roads,
anywhere to escape and scamper away as fast as their legs could carry
them. The color-bearer of Sigel’s own regiment was badly wounded; his
substitute was killed, and the flag itself was captured by Capt. Tom
Staples, a Missourian, of Arrow Rock, Saline county.

When the plateau was reached, the cannon captured and the field gained,
the infantry stopped and cheered, Reid’s and Bledsoe’s batteries fired
parting salutes into the flying blue-coats, and then, leaving the
cavalry to pursue, both infantry and artillery turned about and went up
to the other end of the valley to assist their brethren in that quarter,
and to participate in the final triumph of the day.

Away went the Germans, down to the south into Christian county, throwing
away guns, cartridge boxes, even canteens,—everything that hindered
rapid flight,—wandering about and hiding when they could with the Texas,
Arkansas, and Missouri cavalry leaping upon them incessantly and slaying
them wherever they made the least show of resistance. At Nowlan’s mill,
on the James, three miles from the battle-ground, it was told that four
fugitives skulked under the mill-dam and, refusing to come out, were
riddled with buckshot.

The next day men lay scattered all over the country, wounded or dead;
and yet Sigel lost but comparatively few killed. Prisoners were taken in
great numbers—run down by the Texas rangers and driven in like flocks of
sheep, as timid now and as harmless. Sigel himself got panicky after
awhile and fled for Springfield, across the country, accompanied by only
two guards, giving rise to the wicked stanza of the song sung in the
Confederate camps after the battle, concerning the battle of Wilson’s
Creek,—how,

  Old Sigel fought some on that day,
  But lost his army in the fray;
  Then off to Springfield he did run,
  With two Dutch guards, and nary gun.

At Mrs. Chambers’ house, four miles south of Springfield, Col. Sigel and
his two guards halted and procured a drink of water, and then rode away
to Springfield, as rapidly as their jaded horses could carry them. Sigel
himself arrived at Springfield with but one orderly.

Only the cavalry under Carr and Farrand, the one piece of artillery, two
caissons and about 150 infantry came off in anything like order, and
these followed down the wire road some miles to the west and then turned
off due north and united with Sturgis’ column, near the Little York
road. Only four pieces of artillery were captured at the time of the
charge on the hill, for those were all that were in position. The two
others were in the rear. In attempting to get one of them away a wheel
horse was killed, and the drivers abandoned the gun, after first spiking
it as best they could. The gun that was saved was first abandoned out on
the Fayetteville road, and hauled off at first by hand a short distance,
Capt. Flagg employing the prisoners and soldiers as artillery horses.

Concerning the retreat of that portion of Sigel’s force which went to
the westward, Lieut. Chas. E. Farrand (then of the Second Regular
Infantry) commanding the company of cavalry before mentioned, writes:—

  Upon finding myself with my company alone, I retired in a southerly
  direction, and accidentally meeting one of the guides (Mr. Crenshaw),
  who had been employed in taking us to the enemy’s camp, I forcibly
  detained him until I could collect some of the troops, whom I found
  scattered and apparently lost. I halted my company and got quite a
  number together, and directed the guide to proceed to Springfield, via
  Little York. After proceeding a short distance, we came upon one of
  the pieces which had been taken from Col. Sigel. Although the tongue
  of the limber was broken, one horse gone, and one of the remaining
  three badly wounded, we succeeded in moving it on. Some distance in
  advance of this we found a caisson, also belonging to Col. Sigel’s
  battery. I then had with me Sergt. Bradburn, of company D, 1st
  cavalry, and Corporal Lewis and Private Smith, of my own company (C,
  2d dragoons). My company being some distance in advance, I caused the
  caisson to be opened, and on discovering that it was full of
  ammunition, I determined to take it on. I and the three men with me
  tried to prevail upon some of the Germans to assist us in clearing
  some of the wounded horses from the harness, but they would not stop.
  After considerable trouble, my small party succeeded in clearing the
  wounded horses from the harness, hitching in two more and a pair of
  small mules I obtained, and moved on, Corporal Lewis and Private Smith
  driving, while Sergt. Bradburn and I led the horses. After reaching
  the retreating troops again I put two other men on the animals, and
  joined my company with my three men. Before reaching Springfield it
  became necessary to abandon the caisson,[9] in order to hitch the
  animals to the _piece_. This was done after destroying the ammunition
  it contained. Lieut. Morris, adjutant to Col. Sigel’s command,
  assisted me in procuring wagons, which we sent back on the road after
  the wounded.

The route of retreat taken by Lieut. Farrand and Capt. Flagg, and the
fragments of Sigel’s command, 400 in all, was down the wire road a short
distance, and then north to the Mt. Vernon road. While marching
northward this body of disordered men was only within two or three miles
of the entire Southern army for three or four hours. Why Generals Price
and McCulloch did not send out a small force of mounted men and take
prisoner every man, which could very easily have been done, is
inexcusable, certainly.


                      DR. S. H. MELCHER’S ACCOUNT.

Mention has been made of Dr. Samuel H. Melcher, who as assistant surgeon
of Col. Salomon’s 5th Missouri (Dr. E. C. Franklin, being surgeon), was
present at the battle of Wilson’s Creek with Sigel’s command. To the
writer hereof Dr. Melcher, now of Chicago, sends his recollections of
the events of the memorable contest. After narrating the preliminary
movements of Sigel, substantially as heretofore given, Dr. Melcher
says:—

  * * * Gen. Sigel soon gave the order to fire, which was responded to
  with rapidity, but our guns being on an elevation, and the
  Confederates being in a field which sloped toward the creek, the shots
  passed over their heads, creating a stampede but doing little, if any,
  damage to life or limb. In vain I and others urged the artillerymen to
  depress the guns. Either from inability to understand English, or, in
  the excitement, thinking it was only necessary to load and fire, they
  kept banging away till the whole camp was deserted. * * * The command
  then moved on till it reached the Fayetteville road and Sharp’s house.
  While the command was taking position, I with my orderly, Frank
  Ackoff, 5th Missouri, went into the abandoned Arkansas camp where I
  found a good breakfast of coffee, biscuit and fried green corn. * * *
  Most of the tents were open—a musket with fixed bayonet being forced
  into the ground, but up, and the flap of the tent held open by being
  caught in the flint lock. At that time, besides a few Confederate
  sick, there were in the camp Lieut. Chas. E. Farrand, in command of
  the dragoons, and his orderly. Half an hour later, some straggling
  parties from the 3d and 5th Missouri, set fire to some wagons and camp
  equipage.

  * * * The four guns were in the front, supported by the 3d Missouri,
  with the cavalry and dragoons on the left in the timber. The 5th
  Missouri was in reserve, except Co. K, Capt. Sam’l A. Flagg, which was
  further in the rear, guarding some thirty or forty prisoners. At this
  time, scattering shots were heard at some distance in our front, but
  no heavy firing. Armed men, mostly mounted, were seen moving on our
  right in the edge of the timber. * * *

  It was smoky, and objects at a distance could not be seen very
  distinctly. Being at some distance in front of the command, I saw a
  body of men moving down the valley toward us, from the direction we
  last heard Gen. Lyon’s guns. I rode back, and reported to Gen. Sigel
  that troops were coming, saying to him, “They look like the 1st
  Missouri.” [Iowa?] They seemed moving in a column. * * * By this time,
  Sigel could see them. Not seeing their colors, I suggested to Sigel
  that he had better show his, so that if it _was_ our men they might
  not mistake us—Sigel’s brigade not being in regulation uniform. Gen.
  Sigel turned and said: “Color-bearer, advance with your colors, and
  wave them—wave them three times.” As this order was being obeyed,
  Lieut. Farrand, with his orderly, arrived from the Arkansas camp, each
  bearing a rebel guidon, which they had found, and with which they rode
  from the right of the line, near Sharp’s house, directly in front of
  the color-bearer of Sigel’s regiment. Then there was music in the air.
  A battery we could not see opened with grape, making a great deal of
  noise as the shot struck the fence and trees, but not doing much
  damage, as far as observed, except to scare the men, who hunted for
  cover like a flock of young partridges, suddenly disturbed. The
  confusion was very great, many of the men saying, “It is _Totten’s_
  battery! It is _Totten’s_ battery!” The impression seemed to be
  general that Totten was firing into us, after seeing the rebel guidons
  of Farrand, as it was the common understanding that the Confederates
  had no grape, and these were grape shot, certainly.[10]

  Gen. Sigel _now_ evidently thought of retreat, as the only words I
  heard from him were, “Where’s my guides?” [Instances of individual
  cowardice among Sigel’s officers are here given.] I assisted Lieut.
  Emile Thomas (now of St. Louis), the only officer of his company that
  had the grit to stay, to reform the men. I do not know if we could
  have succeeded, had not a Confederate cavalry battalion suddenly
  appeared in our front, on the line of retreat. For a moment the two
  commands gazed upon each other, and then came a terrible rattle of
  musketry, and a great hubbub and confusion in the direction of Sigel’s
  command, which was just around a bend in the road to our rear.

  In a twinkling, men, horses, wagons, guns, all enveloped in a cloud of
  dust, rushed toward us, and in spite of Lieut. Thomas’s utmost
  efforts, Company F started with all speed _down_ the Fayetteville road
  toward the Confederate cavalry. The latter, seeming to think that they
  were being charged upon, wheeled and got out of the way very quickly!
  The bulk of Gen. Sigel’s command _turned to the east_ and were
  followed by a Confederate command, that captured one gun at the creek,
  many prisoners, and left a considerable number of killed and wounded
  along the road.

  Perhaps one-third of the command went southwest, and halted at the
  next house beyond Sharps’ on the Fayetteville road, and here Dr.
  Smith, who was Gen. Rains’ division surgeon, came up, with a long
  train of wagons and coaches, and was captured, but at once released on
  my intervention. [After this, Dr. Melcher accompanied Dr. Smith to the
  battle-field.] * * * The one gun that was abandoned on the
  Fayetteville road was really saved by Capt. Flagg, whose men drew the
  gun by hand till they found some horses, and the Confederate prisoners
  carried the ammunition in their arms. * * * They came into Springfield
  the same evening by way of Little York.

Sigel’s reasons for his defeat must here be given. He states that he
tried to obey his orders to attack the enemy in the rear and to cut off
his retreat. This he did, but he also cut off his own retreat very
nearly, a circumstance he had not counted upon.

The time of service of one of his two regiments of infantry, the 5th
Missouri, Salomon’s, had expired some days before the battle and they
had clamored to go home. On the first of August he had induced them to
remain with the army eight days more. This latter term had expired the
day before the battle. The men therefore were under no obligations to
fight, except that they had marched out to do so, and when the time
came, suddenly remembered that “they did not have to fight.” The 3d
regiment, Sigel’s own, was not the old 3d, that fought at Carthage; that
regiment, its time having expired, had been mustered out, and the new
regiment was composed of 400 new recruits and of but a few other men who
had seen service. The men serving the artillery were new recruits who
knew next to nothing of gunnery, and were commanded by two lieutenants
whose only experience as artillerists had been in the Prussian army in a
time of peace. Again it is stated that only about half of the companies
were officered by men with commissions, which Sigel says, was the fault
of the three months’ service.

But over all it is claimed that Sigel’s complete defeat was the result
of an attack of vastly superior forces, the flower of McCulloch’s army,
that was permitted to approach fatally near under the mistake that they
were friends instead of enemies.

As explaining and detailing something of the retreat of that wing of
Sigel’s command which turned to the east, the following statement of
Captain (now General) E. A. Carr, who, as previously stated, commanded
the advance guard of Sigel’s brigade, may be found of interest:—

“At about 9 o’clock Capt. Carr received word that Sigel’s infantry were
in full flight and that he was to retreat with all haste. After
galloping away as best he could for about a mile and a half to the rear,
Carr came upon Sigel at the spring where the army had halted the first
night when returning from Dug Spring some days before. After a brief
consultation it was decided to move south on the Fayetteville road until
there was a chance to go out and circle around the pursuing enemy and
then strike for Springfield. There were then present at the spring
Sigel, Carr, Lieut.-Col. Albert, Carr’s 56 cavalry, 200 of Sigel’s badly
demoralized infantry, one piece of artillery, and two caissons. After
“retiring” rather hastily for a mile or so a body of cavalry was
observed in front, and Sigel sent Carr up to see the condition of
affairs and report at once. Arriving at the front Carr discovered that
the Confederate cavalry were coming in from the right and forming across
the road, to stop the retreating Federals and send them back to the care
of McCulloch’s division again. Reporting at once to Sigel, that officer
directed Carr to turn off at the first right-hand road, which happened
to be near the point where he (Carr) then stood. Retreating along this
road in a brisk walk Sigel asked Carr to march slowly so that the
footmen could keep up. Carr replied that unless they hurried forward
they would be cut off at the crossing of Wilson’s Creek, and that the
infantry ought to march as fast under the circumstances as a horse could
walk. Sigel then said, “Go on, and we will keep up.” On arriving at the
creek, however, and looking back, Carr saw that the infantry had not
kept up, but that a large body of Texas and Arkansas cavalry was moving
down and would form an unpleasant junction with him in a few seconds.
“To use a Westernism,” says Gen. Carr, “there was no time for fooling
then, and as I had waited long enough on the slow-motioned infantry to
water my horses, and they were not yet in sight, I lit out for a place
of safety which I soon reached, and after waiting another while for
Sigel, I went on to Springfield. I was sorry to leave Sigel behind, in
the first place, but I supposed all the time he was close to me until I
reached the creek, and then it would have done no good for my company to
have remained and been cut to pieces also, as were Sigel and his men,
who were ambuscaded and all broken up, and Sigel himself narrowly
escaped.”




                              CHAPTER III.
                THE BATTLE OF WILSON’S CREEK.—Concluded.


The Southern Side of the Story—The Part Taken by McCulloch’s
      Army—Preparations for a March on Springfield—A Light Rain
      Interferes—The Federal Attack—A Complete Surprise—McCulloch Thinks
      it “Another of Rains’ Scares!”—The Fight Against Lyon—Order of
      Battle—McCulloch Comes to the Rescue—The Missourians in
      Battle—Detailed Account of the Fighting—The Beginning of the
      End—Victory!—No Pursuit of the Retreating Federals—McCulloch’s
      Destruction of Sigel—After the Famous Victory—Comparative Strength
      and Losses of the Two Armies—The Federal Strength—The Confederate
      Strength—Price’s Army by Divisions—The Federal Loss by Regiments
      and Battalions—The Confederate Loss by Divisions—Disposing of the
      Dead—The Home Guards at Springfield—The Retreat from
      Springfield—Care of the Federal Wounded—The Army Sets out—Hundreds
      of Citizens Follow it—The Confederates Enter
      Springfield—McCulloch’s Proclamation—Price’s Proclamation—Joy and
      Congratulations.


                    THE SOUTHERN SIDE OF THE STORY.

As one side, the Northern, or Federal, or Union side, of the battle of
Wilson’s Creek has been told it is but proper that the other, the
Southern or Confederate, or secession side, should be given. The
statements herein made have been derived from the most authentic sources
possible to be consulted. The writer returns his sincere thanks to those
Confederate officers, scattered from the Iowa line to the Rio Grande,
who have responded to his request for information so promptly and so
fully, and in such well written letters.


                  THE PART TAKEN BY M’CULLOCH’S ARMY.

It will be remembered that Gen. McCulloch had at last yielded to Gen.
Price’s persistent and positive demands, and had agreed to march against
Lyon at Springfield on the night of August 9th and attack him on the
morning of the 10th. The march was to be made in four columns and to be
begun at 9 o’clock at night.

Just after dark a light rain fell, and it was very dark and a heavy rain
storm seemed to be coming up. McCulloch well knew that many of the
Missouri troops were not supplied with cartridge boxes, or cartridges
either, and that if they moved out from under shelter and it rained
hard, as it promised to do, their ammunition would become wet and
unserviceable, carried, as much of it would be, in powder-flasks, cotton
sacks and shot-pouches. There was also danger that in the Egyptian
darkness that had settled down over the land the marching columns would
get lost or bewildered, and not come up to the proper place at the
proper time. Accordingly, just as some of the troops were preparing to
start, McCulloch countermanded the order to march at that time, and the
army lay down to sleep, holding itself in readiness to move, however,
the men with their guns by their sides. Not much sleep was had, however,
for lack of all proper accommodations, and because of the myriads of
mosquitoes on the warpath that night up and down the valley of Wilson’s
creek.

Had Gen. Price been left to himself the day of the 9th, he would have
taken “my Missouri boys” that night and marched toward Springfield over
the very route that Lyon took from Springfield to the Confederate camp,
_via_ the Mt. Vernon road and over the prairie, and the two armies,
Price’s and Lyon’s, would have met, to each other’s surprise, about
midnight, somewhere near the present site of Dorchester.

In his official report to the Confederate Secretary of War, Gen.
McCulloch states that his effective force at the battle of Wilson’s
Creek was 5,300 infantry, 6,000 cavalry, and fifteen pieces of
artillery. The majority of the cavalry were armed only with rifles,
revolvers, shot-guns, and old flint-lock muskets. There were hundreds of
other horsemen along with the army, that were so imperfectly armed as to
be of but little efficiency, and during the battle were only in the way.


                          THE FEDERAL ATTACK.

Col. T. L. Snead states that on the night of the 9th he sat up all night
at Gen. Price’s headquarters, which were on the side of the creek, at
the foot of the sloping, rocky, black-jack hills on whose summit the
main battle was fought. About daybreak Gen. Price got up in great
impatience and sent for McCulloch, who soon afterward arrived,
accompanied by Col. James McIntosh (of the 2d Arkansas Mounted
Riflemen), his assistant adjutant-general. “Gen. Price and I were just
sitting down to breakfast,” says Col. Snead, “and they sat down with
us.”

As the officers were eating, a messenger came running up from the front,
where Gen. Rains’ division was posted, a mile or more away, and said
that the Yankees were advancing, full 20,000 strong, and were on Rains’
line already, peppering his camp with musketry. “O, pshaw,” said
McCulloch, laughingly, “that’s another of Rains’ scares,” alluding to
the Dug Springs affair. “Tell Gen. Rains I will come to the front myself
directly,” he added. The three officers went on eating, and in a minute
or two another messenger came up and reported that the Federals were not
more than a mile away, and had come suddenly upon Rains’ men as they lay
on their arms and had driven them back. McCulloch again said, “O,
nonsense! That’s not true;” but just then Rains’ men could be seen
falling back in confusion. Gen. Price rose up and said to Col. Snead,
“Have my horse saddled, and order the troops under arms at once.” He had
hardly spoken when Totten’s battery unlimbered and sent its first shot,
and about the same instant Sigel’s guns opened.

Dispositions for battle were quickly made. Price was ordered to move at
once towards Rains with the rest of the Missourians. Pearce was ordered
to form on Price’s left. Very soon Totten’s battery was in plain sight
on the top of the hills in front and pounding away, while Sigel’s guns
in the rear plainly gave notice that the Federals were on all sides.

The surprise was perfect. Most of the Southern troops were asleep. The
few pickets that were out had mostly been called in to prepare for the
early march, and this enabled Lyon to get close to the line,—upon the
skirmishers, in fact,—before being discovered. The troops hurried out as
fast and as best they could. The majority of Price’s Missourians had
their horses with them. Nearly every secessionist, upon enlisting,
wanted to ride and did ride. The idea of walking was distasteful in more
ways than one,—it was laborious, to begin with, and it was considered
somewhat plebeian and disgraceful. And the horsemen, so many of them,
proved a serious disadvantage to the Southern cause. They stripped the
country in many parts of this State and west of the Mississippi, not
only of provisions but of forage and provender, cumbered the roads, and
often in battle did more harm than good. At Wilson’s Creek the horses
became frightened and unmanageable, and at one time they and some of
their riders came near stampeding the entire Southern army. Hundreds of
them tried to escape from the field by the Fayetteville road, but found
it held by Sigel and his Germans.


                        THE FIGHT AGAINST LYON.

The Missourians under Rains were first attacked by Lyon. Rains had his
division under arms and in line with commendable promptness. A great
many of his men scattered, it is true, but the majority were soon in
ranks and fighting the enemy. Rains’ division was a large one, including
all the men from the populous secession counties of Saline, Lafayette,
Jackson, Johnson, and Pettis, and it held that part of the line in front
of Totten’s battery. Gen. Price instantly ordered the other division
commanders,—Slack, McBride, Clark and Parsons,—to move their infantry
and artillery rapidly forward to the support of Rains. Rains’ second
brigade was in the extreme advance, and consisted of some 1,200 or 1,500
men, mounted and dismounted, temporarily under the command of Col.
Cawthorn.

Slack’s division of Northwest Missourians was the first to come up, and
under the personal direction of Gen. Price himself, who had come to the
front, took position on Rains’ left, and became instantly engaged. In a
few minutes afterwards came John B. Clark’s division and formed to the
left of Slack. Then came M. M. Parsons’ division, with Col. Kelly’s
regiment or brigade at the head, and went into line to the left of
Clark. Then came the division of Gen. J. H. McBride, who took position
on the left of Col. Kelly and commanded a flank movement on the right of
the enemy, which movement was unsuccessful. (It cannot be learned in
what part of the field the forces of Gen. A. E. Steen, of the 5th
division, Missouri State Guard, did duty.)

In this position, by Gen. Price’s orders, and led by him in person at
the first, the entire line advanced in the direction of the enemy, under
a continuous fire from Lyon’s infantry and Totten’s battery, until it
reached a position within range of its own guns when the Federal fire
was returned, the double-barreled shotguns getting in their work now
very effectively. After a few minutes steady firing the Missourians were
driven back.


                     M’CULLOCH COMES TO THE RESCUE.

Meantime Gen. McCulloch had hurried to the lower end of the valley where
his division was encamped, and the impetuous Texan chieftain speedily
brought out of camp Col. Hebert’s Louisiana regiment, and McIntosh’s
Arkansas mounted riflemen, and hastened to the rescue of the
Missourians. This force went to the east side of Wilson’s Creek and
coming up to the fence enclosing Ray’s cornfield, the Arkansas riflemen
dismounted, and they and the Louisianians leaped over the fence and
charged through the corn upon the Federals (Plummer’s battalion) and
drove them back upon the main line with loss. This fight in the
cornfield was one of the severest of the day, and when it was ended many
a corn blade and stalk and tassel had been torn with bullets, and many a
dead man lay in the furrows. For no sooner had the Federal infantry been
driven back than Dubois’ battery opened on the Confederates in the field
whose surface had never been disturbed by any thing ruder than Farmer
Ray’s plow. But now it was soon plowed by shot and shell, and death
gathered a full harvest where only the husbandmen had reaped before. The
two regiments were driven back with some loss and considerable
confusion, but soon reformed and taken charge of by McCulloch in person,
who led them to another part of the field.

McCulloch had also ordered up Woodruff’s battery, which had engaged
Totten and was doing excellent service. During the period of the fight
in the cornfield, Price’s Missourians were endeavoring to sustain
themselves in the center, and were hotly engaged on the sides of the
height upon which the enemy was posted. Early in the fight, the 1st
Regiment of Arkansas Mounted Rifles, which had been driven out of its
camp by Sigel, and had formed a few hundred yards to the north, was
brought up by Price’s order to the support of Gen. Slack, and formed on
his left. Here it fought during the battle, led in person by its
commander. Col. T. J. Churchill,[11] who had two horses killed under
him. The regiment’s loss was 42 killed and 155 wounded. One captain
(McAlexander) and three lieutenants were among the killed. The 2d
Arkansas Mounted Rifles, Col. B. T. Embry, also fought with the
Missourians against Lyon, losing 11 killed and 44 wounded.

Then came the “forward and back” period of fighting described in the
Federal account, which lasted for hours. Sometimes the advantage was
with one party, sometimes with the other. The firing, both of infantry
and artillery, was incessant. Many deeds of gallantry and heroism were
performed—enough to immortalize the memory of any one of the
perpetrators.

One unfortunate thing, brought about by the battle, was the fact that it
produced, or rather made conspicuous, a large crowd of liars who are yet
wont to brag and bluster about the various deeds of valor they performed
at Wilson’s Creek, while the chances are that instead of displaying any
remarkable quality of bravery or feat of extraordinary value, they were
skulking in the bushes or sitting securely under cover somewhere, not
firing a gun or harming an enemy. This is true of both sides. Pity ’tis
that any man who wore either the blue or the gray should be a liar, but
pity ’tis ’tis true. Deeds worthy of Rome or Sparta—aye, worthy of
America, _were_ rendered that day of battle on Wilson’s creek, but these
shameless liars one often meets with did none of them.

From nearly every quarter of Missouri had come the Missourians who this
day fought under the flag of the grizzly bears and against the stars and
stripes. Slack had men from off the Iowa line; John B. Clark had men
from the Northeast (properly belonging to Harris’ division, not then
south of the Missouri) whose homes were in sight of Hannibal and of the
great Mississippi farther to the north. Men fought who, when at home,
could stand in their door-yards and look westward over on the prairies
of the then territory of Nebraska. Many of McBride’s division were from
Southeastern Missouri, from the swamps of Pemiscot, from the cypress
forests of Dunklin. From the cities—from the warehouses, the
counting-rooms and the law offices of St. Louis, St. Joseph and other
Missouri towns, had come some men to fight against what they believed to
be Federal tyranny and usurpation, and for the honor of old Missouri and
the rights of the South. And men fought under Price that day whose feet
were on “their native heath,” whose homes were in this county, in sight
of the battle-ground.

And they all fought well, those in line, whether advancing or
retreating, firing or falling back. Not any better than the Federals,
perhaps, but fully as well. There were some stragglers on both sides—not
all of the cowards were in but one army.

When early in the engagement Gen. Clark sent a mile and a half to the
rear for his regiment of cavalry, Col. James P. Major, commanding, that
officer was attacked by Sigel at the moment of receiving the order and
driven back into the woods with all his force. After reforming and
starting toward the front where Lyon was, to join their own division,
Major’s men were all broken up by large bodies of other horsemen, who,
seeking to escape from Totten’s grape and Dubois’ shells and the Kansas
men’s musket balls, rode through Major’s ranks in all directions,
dividing the forces and communicating their own terror to those about
them, so that the colonel was left with only one company.

Assisted by Clark’s adjutant-general, Col. Casper W. Bell, of Brunswick,
Chariton county, and Capt. Joseph Finks, the colonel (Major) succeeded
in getting up some 300 men with whom he returned to the rear and
assisted in the defeat of Sigel. The remainder of those who could be
formed into line (and many of them could when they found that the only
road leading out of camp was held by Sigel), were taken charge of by
Lieut. Col. Hyde and advanced to the front where Lyon was, but while
preparing to charge the Federal left they were driven back by Dubois’
battery and some infantry.

At last, after Price’s line had advanced half a dozen times and been
driven back as often, and after the fight had been going on nearly six
hours and victory was not yet certain for either side, McCulloch came
back from whipping Sigel and brought with him the Louisianians,
Carroll’s (Arkansas) and the greater portion of Greer’s (Texas) cavalry,
Col. Tom P. Dockery’s 5th Arkansas infantry, McIntosh’s 2d Arkansas
rifle regiment, under Lieut. Col. Embry, Gratiot’s 3d Arkansas regiment,
and McRae’s regiment. Reid’s battery was also brought up.


                       THE BEGINNING OF THE END.

The terrible fire of musketry was now kept up along the whole side and
top of the hill on which the enemy was posted. Masses of infantry fell
back and again rushed forward. The summit of the hill was covered with
the dead and wounded. Both sides were fighting with all desperation for
the victory. Gens. Price and McCulloch were among their men animating
them by their voice, their presence, and their example. Price was
slightly wounded but would not leave the field.

To relieve the infantry McCulloch resolved to make a diversion in their
favor with the cavalry. Accordingly a portion of Carroll’s and Greer’s
regiments, and a mass of Missourians were formed to go up the valley and
fall upon the Federal left, but, as before stated, Dubois’ battery and
the Federal infantry scattered the horsemen before they could get fairly
into line.


                                VICTORY!

At this critical moment, when the fortunes of the day seemed at the
turning point, McCulloch ordered forward his reserves and threw them
into the scale. Forward came the rest of Pearce’s Arkansas division,
Gratiot’s and Dockery’s regiments, on the run and cheering. Into the
thickest of the fight and throwing away their “tooth-picks,” as their
huge knives were called relied solely on their muskets, and did most
effective work in the center of the line. Reid’s battery was also
ordered forward, and Hebert’s Louisianians were again called into action
on the left of it. Guibor’s battery, of Parson’s division, opened with
canister on the Federals, and terrible was the din and the slaughter.

Now the battle became general and violent and bloody. Hot as a furnace
was the hollow in which the Confederates fought, made so by the blazing
August sun overhead. Hot as a Tophet it became, made so by gunpowder,
and lead and iron, and sweat and blood. Probably no two opposing forces
ever fought with greater desperation, as the Confederate line was
advanced on the last charge. But Lyon was killed, Totten’s battery moved
to the rear, and soon the entire Federal force left the field in
possession of the Southerners.

The battle ended suddenly, “as quick as a clap of thunder ceases,” one
describes it, and for some time after the Federals had retreated it was
not certain to the Confederates how the battle had gone. Another attack
by the blue-coats was expected and prepared for. Gradually the ground in
front where Totten’s battery had stood was occupied, and then a line of
skirmishers, pushing cautiously to the front, discovered that the
victory was theirs. No attempt at pursuit was made, although McCulloch
had 6,000 cavalry, whose horses were fresh and rested, and had not sweat
a hair that day. That the Federals were not pursued, and in their jaded
and exhausted condition cut off from Springfield and captured on the
high prairies west of town, seems inexcusable, even to this day, to
those posted in the facts.

The Federal officers plainly assert that the reason they were not
pursued was because the Confederates were so badly hurt themselves that
they could not do so; and further it is claimed that had Lyon lived a
Federal victory would have been gained, and Price and McCulloch driven
from the field. It is certain (on the authority of Col. Snead), that
Price wished McCulloch to pursue, but the latter, for reasons of his
own, would not. Then Price resumed command of the Missouri State Guard,
and then _he_ would not pursue, for reasons of _his_ own.


                   M’CULLOCH’S DESTRUCTION OF SIGEL.

When Sigel came upon the southern end of the Confederate camp the troops
he encountered were Churchill’s Arkansas regiment, Greer’s Texas
Rangers, and about 700 mounted Missourians under command of Col. James
P. Major and Col. Benjamin Brown, of Ray county, the latter the
President of the Missouri State Senate. These troops, taken unawares,
were speedily pushed back up the valley across the Fayetteville road. It
was at this point of the line,—the Confederate right is faced toward the
east,—where McCulloch’s Confederates were stationed. When Lyon first
opened and alarmed the camp, McCulloch hastened back from Price
headquarters, and took up two of his best regiments (Hubert’s and
McIntosh’s), to the assistance of his comrade-commander. The absence of
these troops weakened the position of McCulloch very materially, and
Sigel had matters his own way for a time. Pearce’s division of Arkansas
State troops were put in position, somewhat in reserve.

When McCulloch became fully aware that the Federal attack on the south
or right was so formidable and so fraught with danger to the entire
army, he brought back the Louisiana and Arkansas regiments, and forming
them with some of Pearce’s division, and Major’s and Brown’s cavalry,
advanced to attack Sigel. The Louisianians and McIntosh’s regiment had
got the worst of it, in the end, in the fight in Ray’s cornfield, but
they came up to the work now in brave style. The attack was being made
on Sigel’s and Salomon’s regiments, and the four guns of Schaeffer and
Schuetzenbach. There was only scattering firing on the part of the
Federals, who mistook the character of the advancing hosts. It was no
fault of McCulloch’s men, however, that Sigel was deceived. The
Louisianians were not to blame that they were mistaken for the Iowa
regiment because of their dress.[12]

On they came, regardless of the short-sightedness of their foes, and not
knowing or caring anything about their enemies’ mistakes until they were
within almost grappling distance of Sigel’s cannon, when they sprang
forward, and with one well contrived and well managed charge swept
everything before them. Then followed the events heretofore
described—the vain attempts to rally—the disorderly panic-stricken
flight—the captures and the pursuit. It must not be forgotten that just
before the charge was made, Reid’s Arkansas battery opened on the
unsuspicious Federal Germans, and they were already in confusion when
the Confederate infantry and cavalry were precipitated upon them. Capt.
Hiram Bledsoe’s Missouri battery, from Lafayette county, with “Old
Sacramento,” a noted 12-pounder, and three other guns, also did
effective work against Sigel, under direction of Col. Rosser, or
Weightman’s brigade.

As soon as Sigel’s destruction had been fairly accomplished (which
occupied but a few minutes) McCulloch left the flying fragments to be
looked after by sundry detachments of the cavalry, and returned with his
infantry and a great deal of the cavalry to the assistance of Gen.
Price. In the last efforts against Lyon’s column, McCulloch’s troops
took a conspicuous part, as before detailed; and of course but for the
part taken by McCulloch’s and Pearce’s men the victory could not have
been won.


                       AFTER THE FAMOUS VICTORY.

_Dies iræ!_ O, the moaning and wailing that were all over the land west
of the great Fathers of Waters when the full tidings of the battle of
Wilson’s Creek were learned! From Dubuque and Baton Rouge, from Iowa and
Texas, from Louisiana and Kansas, and from every county of Missouri,
there went up a sobbing prayer from many a household for strength to
bear the bereavement of a father, a husband, a brother or a son slain
that 10th of August, 1861, down by the beautiful little stream in the
Ozarks.

There they lay, strewn all about over the ground, with faces white and
waxen, or clotted with blood, these men who had died to please the
politicians. In cosy, shady nooks where fairies might delight to dwell;
out in the glare of the blazing sun, festering and corrupting; in
cornfields with blade and tassel waving above them, in dells and glens,
and vales, and on the hillsides—dead men everywhere. With a tiny bullet
hole a baby’s finger might stop, marring no feature and mangling no
limb; with bowels torn out, with faces shattered, heads torn to pieces,
handsome countenances distorted into ghastly, grinning objects—dead men
everywhere.

Wounded men everywhere. Crawling about, delirious with pain and agony;
lying prone and almost motionless, staring up into the blue sky, dying
slowly and making no sign; shrieking, groaning, cursing, praying,
imploring help, begging for a bandage, for water, lying quietly,
laughing even,—wounded men everywhere. In hospitals, under trees, in
tents, in houses, in stables, with surgeons probing and cutting and
carving and sawing and clumsily bandaging; in ambulances jolting off
towards Springfield; limping along to hide and escape another
hurt—wounded men everywhere.

Blood everywhere. On the blades and the silks of the corn; on the leaves
of the pretty green bushes.

  Great drops on the bunch-grass, but not of the dew;

Staining the velvet moss on the hillsides; purpling in puddles in the
pathways and by the roadsides; reddening the lucid waters of bonnie
Wilson’s creek; flecking the wheels of the guns and daubing the stocks
of the muskets; clinging in loathsome gouts to the stems of wild
flowers—blood everywhere—human blood—and the best blood of the Republic,
too.


           COMPARATIVE STRENGTH AND LOSSES OF THE TWO ARMIES.

The strength of both of the contending armies at the battle of Wilson’s
Creek is here given as nearly as it has been possible to obtain it. It
is believed that the Federal strength has been very definitely learned;
that of the combined Southern forces has been approximated in regard to
two or three commands in McCulloch’s division.


                           FEDERAL STRENGTH.

According to the reports of the company commanders on the morning of the
9th of August, there were in the column that marched under Gen. Lyon
exactly 3,721 men of all arms, infantry, cavalry, and artillery, not
including the two companies of home guards under Capts. Wright and
Switzler.

Sigel’s column consisted of 17 companies of infantry (8 of the 3d
Missouri and 9 of the 5th Missouri), numbering 912 men; six pieces of
artillery, 85 men; and two companies of cavalry, 121 men;—Total of
Sigel’s column, 1,118.

Total Federal strength, 4,839—with Wright’s and Switzler’s home guards,
5,000.


                         CONFEDERATE STRENGTH.

Without giving exact details, Gen. McCulloch says, in his official
report to Gen. Cooper, Adjutant General of the Confederate States: “My
own effective force was 5,300 infantry, Woodruff’s and Reed’s batteries,
and 6,000 horsemen.” Total, about 11,550.

Gen. Price’s division was composed of the following subdivisions:—

               Division.              Infantry.   Cavalry.    Total.

  Gen. J. S. Rains’                        1,306      1,200      2,506
  Gen. W. Y. Slack’s                         659        234        884
  Gen. J. H. McBride’s                        ——         ——        605
  Gen. M. M. Parsons’                        256        406        662
  Gen. John B. Clark’s (sr.)                 376        250        626
                                           3,193      2,090      5,283
     And Bledsoe’s and Guibor’s batteries, probably                150
     Grand total of Price’s Missourians.[13]                     5,433

July 30, at Cassville, Gen. McCulloch reported his force and that of
Gen. Pearce, as numbering in aggregate 5,700, “nearly all well armed.”
(Rebellion Records, vol. 3, series I, p. 622). Gen. Pearce loaned the
Missourians six hundred stand of arms. Afterwards, McCulloch received
Greer’s South Kansas Texas cavalry of 1,100 men, and one or two
independent companies from Arkansas, making his and Pearce’s forces
combined, number about 7,000 men. In round numbers the Southern troops
numbered about 12,000 at the battle of Wilson’s Creek; the Federal or
Union forces, 5,000.


                           THE FEDERAL LOSS.

As officially reported, and on file at this day, was as follows:

                 Command.                  Killed.  Wounded.  Missing.

  First Kansas Volunteers,                       77       187        20
  Second Kansas Volunteers,                       5        59         6
  First Missouri Volunteers,                     76       208        11
  First Iowa Volunteers,                         13       138         4
  Capt. Plummer’s Battalion,                     19        52         9
  Company D, 1st Cavalry, Capt. Elliott,          0         1         3
  Capt. Steele’s Battalion,                      15        44         2
  Capt. Carr’s Company,                           0         0         4
  Capt. Wood’s Company Kansas Rangers,            0         1         0
  Capt. Wright’s Dade County Home Guard,          0         2         0
  Capt. Totten’s Battery,                         4         7         0
  Capt. Dubois’ Battery,                          0         2         1
  Col. Sigel’s Regiment, 3d Missouri,            13        15        27
  Col. Salomon’s Regiment, 5th Missouri,         13        38        15
     Total                                      235       754       102

Of the wounded forty-eight are known to have died of their injuries
afterward, making the _actual_ loss in killed 283.

The principal Federal officers killed were Gen. Lyon; Capt. Carey Gratz,
1st Missouri; Capt. A. L. Mason, 1st Iowa.

_Wounded._—Gen. Sweeney; Col. Deitzler, 1st Kansas, (twice); Col.
Mitchell, 2d Kansas; Lieut. Col. Merritt, 1st Iowa; Lieut. Col. Andrews,
1st Missouri; Adjt. Waldron, 1st Iowa; Capt. Plummer, of the regulars.


                     CONFEDERATE LOSS—PRICE’S ARMY.

_Gen. Slack’s Division._—Col. John T. Hughes’ brigade, killed 36;
wounded 70 (many mortally); missing 30. Among the killed were C. H.
Bennett, adjutant of Hughes’ regiment; Capt. Chas. Blackwell, of Carroll
county, and Lieut. Hughes. Col. Rive’s brigade lost 4 killed, and 8
wounded; among the killed were Lieut. Col. Austin, of Livingston county,
a member of the Legislature, and Capt. Engart.

_Gen. Clark’s Division._—Infantry loss, 17 killed and 71 wounded;
cavalry loss, 6 killed and 5 wounded. Among the killed were Capts.
Farris and Halleck and Lieut. Haskins. Among the wounded were Gen. Clark
himself, and Col. Burbridge, both severely, and Capt. D. H. McIntyre,
now attorney general of the State.

_Gen. Parsons’ Division._—Infantry loss, 9 killed and 38 wounded;
cavalry loss, 3 killed and 2 wounded; artillery, Guibor’s battery, 3
killed and 7 wounded. Among the killed was Capt. Coleman, of Grundy
county. Col. Kelly, commanding the infantry, was wounded in the hand.

_Gen. McBride’s Division._—Total loss, 22 killed, 124 wounded. Among the
latter were Col. Foster, and Capts. Nichols, Dougherty, Armstrong, and
Mings.

_Gen. Rains’ Division._—Weightman’s brigade, 35 killed 111 wounded.
Cawthorn’s brigade, 21 killed and 75 wounded. Among the killed were Col.
Richard Hanson Weightman, commanding 1st brigade, and Major Chas.
Rogers, of St. Louis.

Two other prominent officers were killed,—Col. Ben Brown, of Ray county,
commanding cavalry with McCulloch’s army, and Col. George W. Allen, of
Saline county, of Price’s staff. The latter was shot down while bearing
an order, and was buried on the field. Col. Horace H. Brand, of Price’s
staff, was taken prisoner but released soon afterward.

The total of Price’s loss, according to the official reports,
was—killed, 156; wounded 609; missing 30.

_McCulloch’s Army._—The losses of McCulloch’s army in the aggregate was
109 killed, 300 wounded and 50 prisoners. Among the officers killed were
Capt. Hinson, of the Louisiana regiment; Capt. McAlexander, and Adjutant
Harper, of Churchill’s regiment; Capts. Bell and Brown, and Lieuts.
Walton and Weaver, of Pearce’s division. Some of the severely wounded
were Col. McIntosh (by a grapeshot), Lieut. Col. Neal, Major H. Ward,
Captains King, Pearson, Gibbs, Ramsaur and Porter, and Lieuts. Dawson,
Chambers, Johnson, King, Raney, Adams, Hardister, McIvor, and Saddler.

The aggregate Southern loss was not far from 265 killed, 900 wounded and
80 prisoners. A little heavier than that of the Federals, owing to the
long range muskets and rifles of the latter and their more efficiently
served artillery. All agree that the Confederate and secession batteries
as a rule were not well handled.


                        DISPOSITION OF THE DEAD.

The dead at Wilson’s Creek were not well disposed of. All were given
hasty and rude sepulture. Of course the Confederate slain fared the
better, being buried by their own comrades. The Union dead were put
under ground as soon as possible, and with but little ceremony. In an
old well, near the battle field, fourteen bodies were thrown. In a
“sink-hole” thirty-four of their bodies were tumbled. The others were
buried in groups here and there, and the burial heaps marked. In many
instances, a few Federal soldiers were present when the burials were
made, and identified certain graves. Some of the bodies whose graves
were so marked, were afterwards disinterred and removed to their former
homes. A number of the Federal dead were never buried; this was
particularly true regarding Sigel’s men. Dr. Melcher says he saw
portions of the bodies of the German Federals along the line of Sigel’s
retreat, several days after the battle, strewn along near the road,
having been torn by dogs and hogs and buzzards. Skulls, bones, etc.,
indicating that at least a dozen corpses had been left above ground were
gathered up. The doctor’s statement is corroborated by citizens who
lived in the neighborhood.

The weather was hot—oppressively so. Putrefaction soon set in; there was
a scarcity of coffins and coffin-makers, and coffin-maker’s materials,
and perhaps the Confederates did the best they could. Their own dead
were, in many instances, given imperfect burial.

In 1867, six years afterwards, when the National Cemetery at Springfield
was established, the contractor for the removal of the dead bodies of
the Union soldiers on the battle ground, took up and removed, and
received pay for 183 bodies, as follows: Out of the “sink-hole,” 34; out
of the old well, 14; from other portions of the field, 135.


                    THE HOME GUARDS AT SPRINGFIELD.

Back in Springfield there was a large force of Home Guards, numbering
about 1,200, under Col. Marcus Boyd, from Greene and adjoining counties,
all under arms, and all ready and willing to fight. But Gen. Lyon held
their fighting qualities in such poor esteem—having no confidence that
any other sort of troops but regulars would fight well—that he had
refused to allow them to go to the field, saying that they would break
at the first fire and demoralize the rest of the troops, and perhaps
cause him to lose the fight.

But in all probability—no reason appearing to the contrary—if these
1,200 men had been taken out to Wilson’s Creek they would have fought
well—as well as the volunteers, who fought as effectively as the
regulars—and perhaps (who knows?) would have turned the scale in favor
of the Federals. Gen. Lyon made a mistake, certainly, in not employing
against the enemy in his front every man who could be induced to fire a
musket; but his anxiety to not leave his rear and base wholly
unprotected from a cavalry dash or sudden movement of some sort, led to
his leaving this large force in Springfield, which stood in arms all of
the forenoon and heard their comrades fighting so hard away to the
southwest, and, anxious as they were to go to their relief, were
forbidden to do so.

It is related of a certain doughty captain of the Home Guards then and
now a resident of Springfield, that on his reporting to Col. Boyd for
orders the morning of the battle, the colonel sent him out on the Mount
Vernon road, directing him to observe closely the country to the
westward and to report promptly every half hour should anything
extraordinary occur. In a few minutes after the opening of Totten’s
battery, back came the captain ambling along on a little brood mare,
which he was industriously larruping with a lath, and reining up his
steed in front of Col. Boyd, he made a military salute and announced:—

“Colonel Boyd, _Sir_! The _cannings_ is a-firing!” As the roar of every
gun had been plainly audible to everybody, this was not a very new piece
of information, but Boyd replied, “All right, captain; go back to your
post.”

Flourishing his lath as before, the captain rode away, and promptly in
half an hour—still in his hand the lath, which was doing double service,
as a sword and a riding-whip—he returned:—

“Colonel Boyd, _Sir_! The cannings is _still_ a-firing!” And so every
half hour, until the “cannings” had ceased to thunder, when he returned,
and making the same military salute, the faithful lath still in his
grasp, he announced:—

“Colonel Boyd, _Sir_! The cannings is ceased a-firing!”


                     THE RETREAT FROM SPRINGFIELD.

Upon reaching Springfield the Federal army rested a brief time and got
itself ready for flight. A conference of the principal officers was
held, and the command of all the forces given to Col. Sigel, of whom it
is reported Maj. Sturgis said he was not altogether successful in
attack, but was “h—l on retreat.” The citizens were notified, and
hundreds of them began packing up and preparing to follow the army.
These were Union people who dreaded the approach of the Southern troops.
The Home Guards also got ready to move as a part of the army. Many
citizens of the county, living outside of Springfield, got their effects
together and were ready to go.

A vast amount of money belonging to the bank had been made ready for
shipment, by Lyon’s order, and was being guarded by a Home Guard
company. Merchandise of all kinds was loaded into wagons and certain of
the officers “pressed” teams for the occasion to load commissary and
quartermasters’ stores into.

Sigel’s ordnance officer destroyed a considerable quantity of powder
because there were no means of transporting it. The 1st Iowa also burned
a portion of its baggage for the same reason. The town was full of
frightened men, women, and children, wagons, teams, horses, mules, milch
cows, soldiers, infantry, cavalry, and artillery, and there was the
greatest confusion all of the evening and till long after dark, even up
to the time when the hegira commenced. The public square was a perfect
jam of cannon carriages, army wagons, farm wagons, buggies, etc.


                       CARE OF THE UNION WOUNDED.

By 10 o’clock in the forenoon the wounded Federals had begun to arrive
from the front, where the battle was raging, with the news that Lyon was
driving the enemy at all points, the Union people cheered, and bestirred
themselves to take care of the stricken. The new court-house (the
present) and the sheriff’s residence were taken for hospital purposes,
and by midnight contained 100 men; the Bailey house was filled; the
Methodist church building was similarly occupied. Ambulances, carriages,
butchers’ wagons, express wagons, every sort of vehicle with wheels and
springs, plied between the battle field and the town all day and until
after dark, bringing off the wounded.

Many of the ladies of the town volunteered their services and became
hospital nurses. Maj. Sturgis left with Dr. E. C. Franklin, of the 5th
Missouri, the sum of $2,500 in gold, with which to purchase supplies for
the wounded left behind, to care for Gen. Lyon’s body, and for other
necessary expenses. This is upon the authority of Dr. Franklin himself.
The doctor was given general charge of the Federal wounded.


                           THE ARMY SETS OUT.

At last all was ready and the army set out for Rolla, with a train of
wagons three miles long and a huge column of refugees, men, women, and
children, black and white, old and young, in carriages, wagons, carts,
on horseback, on foot, “anyway to get away,” as it has been expressed.
The march was begun at midnight, and by daybreak the head of the column
was outside of the county. No attempt was made on the part of the
Southern troops to pursue and capture the column with its $2,000,000 in
money and stores, and it was not molested in any way—as, it would seem,
it should have been. Sigel was not disturbed until near the crossing of
the Gasconade.

Before crossing this river Col. Sigel received information that the ford
could not be passed well, and that a strong force of the enemy was
moving from West Plains towards Waynesville, to cut off the retreat. He
was also aware that it would take considerable time to cross the
Robidoux and the two Pineys on the old road. To avoid these
difficulties, and to give the army an opportunity to rest, Sigel
directed the troops from Lebanon to the northern road, passing Right
Point, in the southeastern part of Camden county, and Humboldt, Pulaski
county, and terminating opposite the mouth of Little Piney, where in
case the ford could not be passed, the train could be sent by Vienna and
Linn to the mouth of the Gasconade, while the troops could ford the
river at the mouth of the Little Piney to reinforce Rolla. To cross over
the artillery he ordered a ferryboat from Big Piney Crossing to be
hauled down on the Gasconade to the mouth of Little Piney, where it
arrived immediately after the army had crossed the ford. Before reaching
the ford, however, Sigel had given up the command of the army to Maj.
Sturgis, who marched it into Rolla August 19th, where it went into
temporary camp, the first encampment being named “Camp Cary Gratz,” in
honor of the captain of the 1st Missouri, killed at Wilson’s Creek. In a
few days the Missouri and Kansas troops and the 1st Iowa, whose term of
service had long before expired, were sent to St. Louis to be mustered
out.


                  THE CONFEDERATES ENTER SPRINGFIELD.

The battle of Wilson’s Creek ended at about noon of August 10; but not
until about 11 o’clock of the next day, or nearly 24 hours after the
close of the battle, did the first Confederate troops (save a few
prisoners), set foot within the town of Springfield. Sturgis, with the
remains of Lyon’s corps, was not pursued at all. Sigel’s “flying
Dutchmen” were chased but a few miles, while no attempt at formidable
pursuit or to follow up the victory was made by either McCulloch or
Price. Whether this was because, as the Federals claimed, that the
Southerners themselves were so badly damaged as to be unable to follow
the Federals, but had to wait and allow them to go out of the country
before moving camp, or whether Gen. McCulloch himself expected to be
attacked, or had other good reasons for sitting quietly by, cannot here
be stated.

Lyon’s body had been sent in. Certain citizens of Springfield had gone
from town to the Southern camp, and back and forth had ridden many a
man, but no movement was made until late Sunday morning. At about 11
o’clock some Missouri and Texas cavalry rode into town and halted. No
pursuit worthy of the name was attempted after the vast crowd of
citizens and soldiers and citizen-soldiery making its exodus from Greene
county, in some respects like unto that crowd of fugitives led by the
Jewish Lawgiver and guided by a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of
fire by night. Soon the town was pretty well filled with troops, and
Price and McCulloch came in. The stores were visited and the proprietors
interviewed, and there was great activity in mercantile circles for a
time; thousands of dollars worth of goods changed hands in a few hours.
Everything was paid for on the spot,—_in Confederate or Missouri scrip_.

The 11th was Sunday, but, as Gen. McCulloch remarked, “it was just as
good as any other day in war time,” and so the troops were distributed
around, encampments laid out, and preparations made to permanently
occupy the land. On the next day, Monday, the 12th, Gen. McCulloch
issued the following proclamation, which was distributed not only
through this county but throughout the greater portion of the southern
part of the State:—


                    PROCLAMATION OF GEN. M’CULLOCH.

                                              Headquarters Western Army,
                            Camp near Springfield, Mo., August 12, 1861.

  _To the People of Missouri_:—Having been called by the Governor of
  your State to assist in driving the National forces out of the State
  and in restoring the people to their just rights, I have come among
  you simply with the view of making war upon our Northern foes, to
  drive them back and give the oppressed of your State an opportunity of
  again standing up as free men and uttering their true sentiments. You
  have been overrun and trampled upon by the mercenary hordes of the
  North; your beautiful State has been nearly subjugated, but those true
  sons of Missouri who have continued in arms, together with my forces,
  came back upon the enemy, and we have gained over them a great and
  signal victory. Their general-in-chief is slain, and many of their own
  general officers wounded. Their army is in full flight; and now, if
  the true men of Missouri will rise up, rally around our standard the
  State will be redeemed. I do not come among you to make war upon any
  of your people, whether Union or otherwise; the Union people will all
  be protected in their rights and property. It is earnestly recommended
  to them to return to their homes. Prisoners of the Union army, who
  have been arrested by the army, will be released and allowed to return
  to their friends. Missouri must be allowed to choose her own destiny,
  no oath binding your consciences. I have driven the enemy from among
  you; the time has now arrived for the people of the State to act. You
  can no longer procrastinate. Missouri must now take her position, be
  it North or South.

                                                          Ben McCulloch,
                                                  Brig. Gen. Commanding.

This proclamation was well received by the people of the county,
especially the Union portion, who expected nothing else that they were
to be treated with great severity. All looked forward to a season of
security, if not absolute peace. It is painful to be compelled to state,
however, that Gen. McCulloch’s proclamation was not long observed.
Despite its declarations Union men were arrested and their property and
that of their secession neighbors seized and appropriated whenever it
pleased the subordinate Confederate officers to do so.

In connection with his proclamation, and on the same day McCulloch
issued the following congratulatory order to the troops under his
command over the result of the battle of Wilson’s Creek:—


                        GEN. M’CULLOCH’S ORDER.

                                              Headquarters Western Army,
                            Near Springfield, Missouri, August 12, 1861.

  The General commanding takes great pleasure in announcing to the army
  under his command, the signal victory it has just gained. Soldiers of
  Louisiana, of Arkansas, of Missouri, and of Texas, nobly have you
  sustained yourselves. Shoulder to shoulder you have met the enemy and
  driven him before you. Your first battle has been glorious and your
  general is proud of you. The opposing forces, composed mostly of the
  old regular army of the North, have thrown themselves upon you,
  confident of victory; but, by great gallantry and determined courage,
  you have routed them with great slaughter. Several pieces of artillery
  and many prisoners are now in your hands. The commander-in-chief of
  the enemy is slain, and many of the general officers wounded. The flag
  of the Confederacy now floats near Springfield, the stronghold of the
  enemy. The friends of our cause who have been in prison there are
  released. While announcing to the army the great victory, the general
  hopes that the laurels you have gained will not be tarnished by a
  single outrage. The private property of citizens of either party must
  be respected. Soldiers who fought as well as you did the day before
  yesterday cannot rob or plunder. By order of

                                                          Ben McCulloch,
                                                     General Commanding.

  James McIntosh, Capt. C. S. A. and Adjutant General.

General Price was also seized with the proclamation fever and a few days
after the occupation of Springfield, that is to say on August 20th,
published the following:—


                       GEN. PRICE’S PROCLAMATION.

  To the People of Missouri:—_Fellow-citizens_: The army under my
  command has been organized under the laws of the State for the
  protection of your homes and firesides, and for the maintenance of the
  rights, dignity and honor of Missouri. It is kept in the field for
  these purposes alone, and to aid in accomplishing them, our gallant
  Southern brethren have come into our State. We have just achieved a
  glorious victory over the foe, and scattered far and wide the
  well-appointed army which the usurper at Washington has been more than
  six months gathering for your subjugation and enslavement. This
  victory frees a large portion of the State from the power of the
  invaders, and restores it to the protection of its army. It
  consequently becomes my duty to assure you that it is my firm
  determination to protect every peaceable citizen in the full enjoyment
  of all his rights, whatever may have been his sympathies in the
  present unhappy struggle, if he has not taken an active part in the
  cruel warfare, which has been waged against the good people of this
  State, by the ruthless enemies whom we have just defeated. I therefore
  invite all good citizens to return to their homes and the practice of
  their ordinary avocations, with the full assurance that they, their
  families, their homes and their property shall be carefully protected.
  I, at the same time, warn all evil disposed persons, who may support
  the usurpations of any one claiming to be provisional or temporary
  Governor of Missouri, or who shall in any other way give aid or
  comfort to the enemy, that they will be held as enemies, and treated
  accordingly.

                                                         Sterling Price,
                                   Maj.-Gen. Commanding Mo. State Guard.

  August 20, 1861.

It will be observed that the terms of Gen. Price’s proclamation differed
somewhat from McCulloch’s. The latter declared that prisoners of the
Union army would be released and allowed to return to their friends,
while Gen. Price declared that no man who had taken an active part in
the “cruel warfare which had been waged against the good people (_i.e._,
the secession good people) of the State” should be protected in his
rights. And yet Gen. Price was as much a friend of the Union people and
Union troops as Gen. McCulloch, and showed them as many favors.


                        JOY AND CONGRATULATIONS.

The news of the battle of Wilson’s Creek was received with great joy
throughout the Southern Confederacy and everywhere that the Confederate
cause had sympathizers, and the event did much for that cause in
Missouri, by stimulating recruiting and causing many an undecided
individual to come down off the fence and stand on the Southern side.
Some time afterward, November 4, 1861, when the “Claib. Jackson
Legislature” (as the Legislature that passed the Neosho ordinance of
secession was called), was in session at Cassville, it passed the
following resolution, introduced by Mr. Goodlett, under a suspension of
the rules:—

  _Resolved by the Senate, the House of Representatives concurring
  therein_: That the thanks of the State of Missouri are hereby
  cordially given to Major-General Price and Brigadier-Generals Parsons,
  Rains, Slack, Clark, McBride, and Steen, and the officers and troops
  of the Missouri State Guard under their command, and to
  Brigadier-General McCulloch and officers and the troops of the
  Confederate States under their command, for their gallant and signal
  services and the victory obtained by them in the battle of
  Springfield.

The following resolutions were introduced into the Confederate Congress
on the 21st of August, by Mr. Ochiltree, of Texas, and were passed
unanimously:—

  Whereas, It has pleased Almighty God to vouchsafe to the arms of the
  Confederate States another glorious and important victory, in a
  portion of the country where a reverse would have been disastrous, by
  exposing the families of the good people of the State of Missouri, to
  the unbridled license of the brutal soldiery of an unscrupulous enemy;
  therefore

  _Be it Resolved by the Congress of the Confederate States_, That the
  thanks of Congress are cordially tendered to Brig.-Gen. McCulloch and
  the officers and soldiers of his brave command for their gallant
  conduct in defeating after a battle of six and a half hours a force of
  the enemy equal in numbers and greatly superior in all their
  appointments, thus proving that a right cause nerves the heart and
  strengthens the arms of the Southern people, fighting as they are for
  their liberty, their homes and friends, against an unholy despotism.

  _Resolved_, That in the opinion of Congress, Gen. McCulloch and his
  troops are entitled to and will receive the grateful thanks of all our
  people.




                              CHAPTER IV.
PROMINENT REGIMENTS AND OTHER SUBORDINATE COMMANDS ENGAGED IN THE BATTLE.


_Confederate Commands._—The 3d Louisiana Infantry—1st Arkansas Mounted
      Rifles—2d Arkansas Mounted Rifles—McRea’s Arkansas Battalion—3d
      Arkansas Infantry—4th Arkansas Infantry—6th Arkansas Infantry—1st
      Arkansas Cavalry. _Federal Commands._—The 1st Iowa Infantry—1st
      Missouri Infantry—1st Kansas Infantry—2d Kansas Infantry—Totten’s
      Battery—Dubois’ Battery—Steele’s Battalion—Plummer’s Battalion—The
      Home Guards.


The particular part taken in the battle of Wilson’s creek by some of the
leading regiments of each side may be of interest, and is here
described, the facts being obtained from actual participants—the
commanding officers when possible.


                         CONFEDERATE COMMANDS.


                       THIRD LOUISIANA INFANTRY.

A considerable portion of the services of this regiment have already
been narrated. Aroused by Gen. McCulloch himself, the colonel of the
regiment, Louis Hebert, formed the 3d Louisiana and followed the road to
Springfield, a short distance to a narrow by-road running north and
leading to Ray’s corn-field, then held by Plummer’s regulars. In front
of the corn-field was a dense thicket, through which the regiment
advanced, and here it instantly became engaged. At the first fire
Sergeant Major Renwick, of the regiment, and Private Placide Bossier, of
the “Pelican Rangers No. 1,” of Natchitoches, were killed.

The 3d Louisiana jumped the fence, charged, and soon drove Plummer’s men
from the corn-field. Still advancing, they reached an oat field, and
here Dubois’ battery opened on them, as did some of the Federal
infantry, and the regiment was driven back in some confusion. Col.
Hebert ordered it to fall back to the woods higher to the right, but the
regiment became separated, and the greater portion—the right wing and
some of the left—were formed outside of the field by Lieut. Col. S. M.
Hyams, and, by orders of Gen. McCulloch, went down the creek valley to
attack Sigel. Col. Hebert succeeded in forming two companies into a
detachment of about 100 men and marched in an opposite direction, toward
the force under Gen. Lyon. Col. Hebert advanced within about 500 yards
of Totten’s battery, where he remained in front of the Federal line for
nearly half an hour under a severe fire, when the detachment was forced
to retire. Again it formed and then marched down and joined the right
wing under Lt.-Col. Hyams, which had just returned from defeating Sigel.
The entire regiment then moved against the Federal position on Bloody
Hill.

The companies led by Lieut. Col. Hyams against Sigel were the “Pelican
Rifles,” Capt. John P. Vigilini; the “Eberville Grays,” Lieut. Verbois;
the “Morehouse Guards,” Capt. Hinson; the “Pelican Rangers No. 1,” Capt.
Breazeale; the “Pelican Rangers No. 2,” Capt. Blair; the “Winn Rifles,”
Capt. Pierson; the “Morehouse Fencibles,” Capt. Harris; the “Shreveport
Rangers,” Capt. Gilmore; a few of the “Monticello Rifles,” under
Sergeant Walcott, and a detachment of Missourians, 75 in number,
commanded by a Capt. Johnson. The regiment was conducted across the ford
of Wilson’s creek and down the valley in front of Sigel’s position by
Col. James McIntosh.

Arriving in front of Sigel’s battery, the regiment formed, and by order
of Lieut. Col. Hyams advanced up the steep hill to the charge. Near the
brow of the hill Lieut. Lacey, of the “Shreveport Rangers,” sprang on a
log, waved his sword, and called out to his company, “Come on, Caddo!”
Shreveport is in the parish of Caddo, Louisiana. The whole command
rushed forward, carried the position, captured the guns, and drove the
already panic-stricken Federal Germans in terror from the field. The
captured cannon were rolled down the hill, and one piece, with its
horses, was taken to the main command.

The “Pelican Rifles” and the “Iberville Grays” were under command of
Capt. Vigilini, of the former company. When within thirty or forty yards
of Sigel’s battery, Gen. McCulloch being in person with the 3d
Louisiana, a Federal soldier appeared in plain view on the hill. Gen.
McCulloch himself called out, “What troops are those?” The man replied,
“Sigel’s regiment,” at the same time raising his rifle to shoot the
general; but Corporal Henry Gentles, of Vigilini’s company, had his
Mississippi rifle in position and shot the Federal dead in an instant,
thus saving Gen. McCulloch’s life.

In the assault on Sigel Capt. Hinson and his brother-in-law, Private
Whetstone, both of the “Morehouse Guards,” were killed, it is said, by
the same shot. Among the members of the regiment who distinguished
themselves were Color-bearer Felix Chaler, Corporal Hicock (killed),
Drum-Major Patterson, Orderly Sergeant Alphonse Prudhomme, Private I. P.
Hyams, Corporal Gentles, and Sergt. W. H. Tunnard. The regiment was
especially complimented by Gen. McCulloch in his official report.

The 3d Louisiana lost in killed one commissioned officer, one
non-commissioned officer and seven privates; total killed nine; wounded,
three commissioned officers, six non-commissioned officers and
thirty-nine privates; total wounded, forty-eight; missing, three
privates. Total casualties, sixty.


                     FIRST ARKANSAS MOUNTED RIFLES.

The 1st Arkansas Mounted rifles was at the time of the battle of
Wilson’s creek in the Confederate service, and was commanded by Col. T.
J. Churchill. It belonged to McCulloch’s division and was encamped at
the lower end of the Confederate position. At about breakfast time
Sigel’s battery and his infantry opened on the regiment, which lay in an
open field. Being exposed to a raking fire from cannon and musketry, the
regiment fell back into the woods on the north, and there formed under
direction of Col. Churchill himself, who, as soon as his alignment had
been made, moved down on the wire road in the direction of Springfield.

Having reached the little valley of Wilson’s creek, Col. Churchill was
met by an aid de camp of Gen. Price, asking for a reinforcement to go to
the assistance of Gen. Slack, then being hard pressed. Col. Churchill
immediately moved his regiment rapidly forward, under a heavy fire, took
position on Gen. Slack’s left, and ordered his men to commence firing.
Here the 1st Arkansas fought for about four hours, being in front of
Totten’s battery and the 1st Iowa the greater portion of the time. At
times it would advance, then fall back, but its conduct was most
admirable, there being but little if any straggling or disorder. It
continued to fight until the Federals retreated from the field.

During the engagement Col. Churchill had two horses shot under him. The
lieutenant colonel, Matlock, and the major, Harper, of the regiment
evinced great bravery and gallantry. Adjutant James Harper, Capt. M. E.
Alexander, and Lieuts. Dawson, Chambers, and Johnson were killed; Capts.
Ramsaur and Porter, and Lieuts. King, Raney, Adams, Hardester and McIvor
were severely wounded, and Capts. Pearson and Gibbs and Lieuts. Saddler,
Wair and Head were slightly wounded. The 1st Arkansas suffered more than
any other regiment of Southern troops engaged in the battle. Its loss
was forty-two killed and one hundred and fifty-five wounded.

In acknowledgment of the conspicuous services rendered by the 1st
Arkansas to his army, Gen. Price, a few days after the battle caused the
following letter to be sent to Col. Churchill:—

                                      Headquarters Missouri State Guard,
                                        Springfield, Mo., Aug. 15, 1861.

  Colonel:—I am directed by Maj.-Gen. Price to thank you, in the name of
  this army and of the State of Missouri, for the very important
  services which you and your fine regiment of Mounted Riflemen have
  rendered during the campaign in this State, and do particularly
  acknowledge, in the most grateful manner, the eager bravery with which
  your men met the enemy on the 10th inst.—the constancy with which they
  fought, and the spirit with which they rushed upon and drove back his
  disciplined soldiers. Your own gallantry and skill were so conspicuous
  on that memorable day that every Missourian will always cherish the
  remembrance of you with pride and gratitude.

  I have the honor to be, Colonel,

                                                  Your obedient servant,
                                                         Thos. L. Snead,
                                                       Acting Adjt. Gen.

  Col. Thos. J. Churchill, 1st Regt. Ark. Mounted Rifles.


                    SECOND ARKANSAS MOUNTED RIFLES.

This regiment was led by its commander, Col. James McIntosh, into the
battle, and took part with the 3d Louisiana in the fight with Plummer’s
regulars, in Ray’s cornfield, early in the morning. When first attacked
it was at breakfast, but, instead of retreating in confusion, rallied at
the call of the bugle, mounted, and was marched by Lieut. Col. Benj. T.
Embry to the timber on the east side of Wilson’s Creek, north of
Woodruff’s battery. Here it dismounted and stripped for the fight, and
Col. McIntosh then appeared and took it into the engagement.

After the fight in Ray’s cornfield, Col. McIntosh was sent for by Gen.
McCulloch, and Lieut. Col. Embry took command of the 2d Arkansas. The
regiment moved across the creek to the west and became engaged with
Lyon’s men on Bloody Hill. At one time it repulsed a desperate charge,
losing heavily in so doing, however. After this, under Col. Embry, the
regiment fell back to the creek and rested a short time, preparing to
receive a cavalry charge, which it was expected would be made. It then
moved up the hill again, but did not become engaged, and soon after the
Federals retreated.

The loss of the 2d Arkansas was, in killed, one non-commissioned officer
and 9 privates; total, 10. Wounded, one captain, two second lieutenants,
eight non-commissioned officers, and 33 privates; total 44. Total
casualties, 54.


                      M’RAE’S ARKANSAS BATTALION.

Upon the opening of the battle in good earnest, or about 6 A. M., this
battalion, led by its commander, Lieut. Col. D. H. McRae, moved up the
wire road toward Springfield, and formed to the left of the 3d
Louisiana, and in front of Woodruff’s battery. In a short time, by Gen.
McCulloch’s orders, it countermarched and moved off across the valley
toward the southwest to take and hold an eminence in that quarter
threatened by Sigel’s men. While on its way the battalion was broken up
by a large body of mounted Missourians, who, panic-stricken and
demoralized, were riding rapidly away from Totten’s battery and the
Federals on Bloody Hill. These mounted warriors rode wildly through the
battalion, threatening to trample down the men and forcing them to
scatter to save themselves. Col. McRae was able to take but one entire
company and a few files of another into the fight proper.

On arriving at the summit of the hill the battalion was fired on by a
battery reported as being Bledsoe’s, of the Missouri troops, but in
reality was Sigel’s. Thick brush intervening, Col. McRae was unable to
distinguish for himself, but at last charged at a “trail arms.” Within
twenty paces of the Fayetteville road a body of men were observed moving
rapidly away, and these were fired on. Here Col. McRae halted and formed
his men so as to sweep the road. In a short time another body came up,
and being dressed like the Confederates, and some of them calling out,
“We are from the South,” deceived Col. McRae until nearly all of them
had passed, when he opened fire on their rear. He then led his men to
the hill where Sigel’s battery had been captured, and here he found the
three companies of the battalion that had been cut off by the Missouri
horsemen. The united battalion then marched to the Fayetteville road to
the north, it having been reported that the Federals were reforming
there, but this report was found to be untrue, and Col. McRae returned
to camp.

The loss of the battalion was two men killed, one mortally wounded, one
severely wounded, and five slightly wounded.


                        THIRD ARKANSAS INFANTRY.

This regiment was commanded by Col. John R. Gratiot, and belonged to the
Arkansas State troops, Gen. Pearce’s division. Its lieutenant-colonel,
David Provence, and its major, Ward, were present at the battle.

In the first part of the action the regiment was moved to the support of
Woodruff’s battery, and here it remained for some hours under a heavy
fire of shot and shell. At about 11 o’clock Gen. Pearce ordered the
regiment to cross the creek and move to the help of Price’s division.
Col. Gratiot marched the men over the stream and up the ridge by a flank
movement and in column of fours. When near the Federal position the line
was fronted and faced the enemy, and moved forward, but just then a
heavy fire was opened in front, two guns of Totten’s battery turned
loose on the regiment with grape, and canister and shell, and so
terrific was the ordeal, that the regiment was obliged to lie down and
return the fire in that position. This was the last fight of Lyon’s men,
and they kept it up only about thirty minutes, when they retreated. The
3d Arkansas remained on the field in position long after the firing had
ceased.

After Maj. Sturgis had retreated with the remnant of Lyon’s division
from Bloody Hill, it was feared that he would cross the creek, move
round to the east and come upon Woodruff’s battery, still in position on
the ground it had occupied during the day. Col. Gratiot’s regiment was
again ordered to the support of this battery, and here it remained until
ordered into camp by Gen. McCulloch.

The regiment suffered most during the thirty minutes it was engaged with
the Federal infantry (Second Kansas and part of First Iowa), and
Totten’s battery on Bloody Hill, but it stood well and gave back blow
for blow. Capts. Brown and Bell were killed and about twenty-five other
brave men and true met their fate in this battle.

Capt. Woodruff’s battery, the “Pulaski artillery,” was attached to the
Third Arkansas during the battle. This battery did more execution and
service than any other Confederate battery that took part in the
engagement. The damage it inflicted on the enemy was prodigious.
Officers and men behaved with great coolness, courage and judgment.

The casualties in the Third Arkansas and Woodruff’s battery
were:—killed, twenty-five; wounded, eighty-four; missing, one; total,
one hundred and ten.


                       FOURTH ARKANSAS INFANTRY.

The Fourth Arkansas infantry on the morning of the battle was placed
under Adjutant-General Rector, who remained in command during the day.
The regiment was not brought into immediate action, being stationed on
the hill for the protection of Reid’s battery, and, although exposed to
the trial of having to submit to a severe fire from the enemy, which it
was unable to return, all the officers and men behaved with great
coolness during the day. There were none killed or wounded in this
regiment. [The colonel of the First Arkansas, J. D. Walker, is at
present (1883) one of the United States Senators from Arkansas.]


                        FIFTH ARKANSAS INFANTRY.

This, another regiment of Gen. Pearce’s division, was commanded by Col.
Tom P. Dockery, and for about two hours after the battle commenced was
posted on the height southeast of McCulloch’s encampment, and occupied a
hill east of Wilson’s creek as a guard for Reid’s battery.

When the Third Louisiana and Third Arkansas moved up against the
Federals on Bloody Hill Col. Dockery sent to their support Capts.
Titsworth’s, Dismuke’s, Neal’s, Dowd’s, Whaling’s and Lawrence’s
companies, all under Lieut. Col. Neal. While gallantly leading his men
Col. Neal fell severely wounded, and Col. Dockery then assumed command.
Only the companies named were actively engaged against the enemy on
Bloody Hill, the companies of Capts. Hartzig, Arnold, McKeon and
Hutchinson having been detailed to serve as skirmishers at one time
after Reid’s battery had changed position. The Fifth Arkansas did its
duty well in this battle, and its conduct was commented on by Gen.
Pearce in the warmest terms. It never wavered or showed the least sign
of demoralization. The loss of the regiment was three killed and eleven
wounded.


                        FIRST ARKANSAS CAVALRY.

Mention has already been made of the services performed by this
regiment. For a while it supported the Missourians of Price’s division;
then it charged by the flank on Totten’s battery; then charged again on
the position held by the Second Kansas, and all the time during the
engagement was under fire. While thousands of other cavalry were
demoralized and fleeing hither and thither, the First Arkansas kept on
the field and sought more than once to charge as cavalry over ground
almost Alpine in character—rugged, rough, precipitous and broken. Its
commander, Col. DeRosey Carroll, was complimented more than once for the
gallant conduct shown by himself and his regiment.

The loss of the First Arkansas cavalry was five killed; two mortally
wounded; twenty-six severely wounded, and nineteen missing, as follows:—

Capt. Lewis’ company—two killed, two mortally and five severely wounded.

Capt. Park’s company—one killed, three wounded, one missing.

Capt. Walker’s company—four wounded, including Capt. Walker himself, and
three missing.

Capt. Withers’ company—two killed, four wounded, two missing.

Capt. Perkins’ company—four wounded, four missing.

Capt. Kelly’s company—one missing.

Capt. Armstrong’s company—one wounded, eight missing.


                           FEDERAL COMMANDS.


                        THE FIRST IOWA INFANTRY.

The 1st Iowa Infantry was a three months regiment whose time had expired
several days before the battle, but it had remained on duty with Lyon to
aid him in his emergency. At the time of the fight its colonel, J. F.
Bates, lay sick in Springfield, and Lieut. Col. Wm. H. Merritt, led the
regiment. As has been stated the 1st Iowa was in Lyon’s column. At the
beginning of the fight it was in the reserve, but advanced when the 1st
Kansas gave way and received the first fire of the enemy while in a
state of some confusion, the result of the retreat of the Kansans
through the Iowa’s ranks. The regiment fired on a body of Confederate
cavalry advancing to charge Totten’s battery, and dispersed it, or drove
it back. Soon after the regiment became engaged generally, and bore its
full share of the conflict.

Four companies of the 1st Iowa, and a company of regular infantry under
Capt. Lothrop, supported Totten’s battery at the close of the engagement
and covered the retreat, receiving and returning the last fire of the
enemy. The regiment lost 13 killed (including Capt. A. L. Mason) 138
wounded and 4 missing. Total 155.


                        FIRST MISSOURI INFANTRY.

The 1st Missouri Infantry was led into the battle of Wilson’s Creek by
its lieutenant colonel, George L. Andrews, its colonel, Frank P. Blair,
being in his seat in Congress at the time. When Gen. Lyon’s column had
reached the immediate proximity of Rains’ division, the regiment was
brought forward to the head of the column and directed to march parallel
with the advance—Gilbert’s regulars—and about 60 yards distant to the
right. In a few moments orders were received to throw one company
forward as skirmishers, and Company H, Capt. Yates, was sent forward,
followed by the regiment in column of companies.

It is claimed that the action was begun by shots from Capt. Yates’
skirmishers. At any rate, soon after they opened fire Company B was sent
up as a reinforcement, and the regiment wheeled into line and
immediately became engaged, at first returning a fire directed against
its left flank. Very soon after Woodruff’s and Guibor’s batteries opened
on the Federal position and their shells fell uncomfortably plenty among
the 1st Missouri. One or two of the shells which did not explode were
examined and pronounced to be those furnished Sigel’s batteries, leading
to the conclusion that Sigel was firing by mistake against Lyon’s
column.

The regiment stood well in line and fought bravely. Capt. Nelson Cole
was severely wounded in the jaw, but remained on the field, and, though
unable to speak, from the nature of his wound, he continued to encourage
his men by signs to stand their ground. Capt. Cary Gratz, of St. Louis,
a native of Lexington, Ky., while advancing at the head of his company,
discovered a body of Confederates advancing, led on by a mounted
officer. Capt. Gratz fired with his revolver and the Confederate officer
fell from his horse, but rose and rushed toward his lines, when the
captain fired again and the other officer pitched headlong to the
ground. Almost immediately Capt. Gratz fell dead, being pierced by four
or five shots.

Capt. John S. Cavender, with his company, G, was in an advanced position
and several times prevented the left flank from being turned. Col.
Andrews, while with the left wing was severely wounded, but he procured
a big drink of whiskey, and soon returned to his post. In a few minutes
his horse was killed and fell upon him. Going to Dubois’ battery during
a lull in the fighting, Col. Andrews was sent to the rear by Surgeon P.
M. Carnyn.

The Confederates now pressed the 1st Missouri so vigorously that the
regiment in all probability would have given way had not Maj. Schofield
and Gen. Lyon opportunely brought up the 1st Iowa and Maj. Osterhaus
(assisted by Lieut. David Murphy, of the 1st Missouri) come forward with
his battalion of the 2d Missouri Infantry. The regiment then remained on
the field and did nobly during the remainder of the engagement, and when
ordered to fall back with the main column and leave the field it did so
in good order.

Out of 27 officers who went into the fight, 13 were either killed or
wounded. Capt. Madison Miller discovered a movement of the Confederate
cavalry to his rear and stopped it by the stout fight he made with his
company, assisted by the artillery. Capt. Cavender, though severely
wounded, refused to leave his post, mounted his horse and remained until
completely exhausted. Surgeon Carnyn, on more than one occasion, took up
a musket and fought in the ranks. Lieut. David Murphy, although severely
wounded in the leg, went to the rear and assisted in bringing up
Osterhaus’ battalion of the 2d Missouri. Adjt. Hiscock and other
officers bore themselves so well that they received especial mention.

Among the men Corporal Kane, of Company K, when the color sergeant was
killed and nearly all the color guard either killed or wounded, brought
the colors safely off the field. Sergt. Chas. M. Callahan, Company K,
Sergt. Chris. Conrad, of Company G, and Private Elworthy, of Company F,
were noted for their valuable services and for their coolness and
bravery. The part borne by the 1st Missouri may be imagined when it is
remembered that its loss was 76 men killed, 208 wounded and 11 missing.


                         FIRST KANSAS INFANTRY.

On coming upon the battle field in the early morning, the 1st Kansas
Infantry—led by its colonel, Geo. W. Deitzler, and its major, John A.
Halderman—was posted in the rear of the 1st Missouri and 1st Iowa. Very
soon Gen. Rains’ skirmishers or outposts were driven in, Totten’s
battery took position and opened fire, while the 1st Missouri was sent
up and soon became engaged.

At this time, under an order from Gen. Lyon, the 1st Kansas moved to the
front in “double quick,” while the right wing and one company from the
left, under command respectively of Capts. Chenoweth, Walker, Swift,
Zesch, McFarland, and Lieut. McGonigle—all under Col. Deitzler—advanced
to a position beyond that occupied by the 1st Missouri, and here,
forming in the very face of the enemy, engaged the Confederates and held
their ground steadfastly under an uninterrupted and murderous fire of
artillery and infantry.

The four remaining companies of Capts. Clayton, Roberts, Stockton, and
Lieut. Angell, under Maj. Halderman, having been posted on the right of
Totten’s battery as support, where they suffered severely from a
constant fire, were now brought up by Maj. Halderman, who called out,
“Forward boys, for Kansas and the old flag!” Aligning with remarkable
coolness upon the remnant of the six right companies the four left
companies settled down to work. With but slight and immaterial changes
of position the 1st Kansas occupied this ground for over two hours,
holding its ground and dealing and receiving severe punishment.

While thus engaged, Capt. Chenoweth, Capt. Clayton and a portion of
Capt. McFarland’s company under Lieut. Malone, were ordered to charge
the enemy with their commands, which order they executed and drove back
the Confederates a considerable distance, although soon after they were
themselves compelled to retire. While leading this charge Col. Deitzler
had his horse killed under him, and was himself severely wounded. The
command then devolved on Maj. Halderman. The regiment now had a very
exposed position, lying in plain view, obliquely across a ridge, but,
though it suffered severely, it bore itself well.

When the 2d Kansas fell back the 1st formed on its left, three companies
remaining on the brow of the hill, and on the right of the battery.
After the severe volley firing had ceased for a few minutes—the
Confederates having retired—it was recommenced by them again as they
advanced, and kept up for nearly a quarter of an hour, when the whole
Federal line, apparently, opened on them and they again retired down the
hill. After this Maj. Sturgis ordered the retreat.

With scarcely any material change of its position the 1st Kansas stood
under fire and returned it, maintained every ground assigned it, without
turning its back on the foe, for the five long hours during which the
battle raged. Its loss was the heaviest in killed of the Federal
regiments engaged—77, one more than the 1st Missouri. It had 187 men
wounded and 20 missing; total, 284. It went into action with nearly 800
men, and left the field in good order with about 500.


                      THE SECOND KANSAS INFANTRY.

This regiment, as stated in the general description of the battle, was
at first stationed in reserve on a hill on the right of and overlooking
Ray’s cornfield, where Plummer’s battalion fought. After Plummer had
been driven back and the pursuing Confederates checked by Dubois’
battery, Lieut-Col. Chas. W. Blair, of the 2d Kansas, rode to Gen. Lyon
and requested that the regiment be given a place in the front. Gen. Lyon
gave the order and Col. Mitchell brought the regiment forward, in time
to take part in the last grand charge. Prior to this, and early in the
action, before the regiment, as a regiment, was fairly under fire, a
force of Missouri cavalry (presumably of Rains’ division) attempted a
flank movement, and Maj. W. F. Cloud, of the 2d, taking Capt. McClure’s
company and deploying it, drove them back after a few volleys.

As the regiment went up to the forefront, Gen. Lyon put himself at its
head and assisted the field officers in bringing it into action. Just as
the regiment raised the crest of the hill, and while it was still in
column, a terrific fire was opened on it, and it was under this fire
that Gen. Lyon fell dead and Col. Mitchell was severely wounded. Gen.
Lyon was leading the 2d when he was killed. After Col. Mitchell was
wounded, command of the regiment was assumed by Lieut-Col. Blair and
Maj. Cloud, who threw the men into line, and after a hard fight of
fifteen minutes the Confederates were driven down the hill, and a lull
in the conflict resulted.

About this time Capt. Powell Clayton’s company, of the 1st Kansas, was
attached to the left of the 2d, and the companies of Capts. Roberts,
Walker and Zesch, also of the 1st, were formed on the right. On the
right of this position a ravine stretched down to the enemy, and up this
ravine the Confederates (of John B. Clark’s division) attempted to flank
Col. Blair. Some men sent down it from Capt. Cracklin’s company did not
return, and then Col. Blair himself rode out to see what was the matter.
He had not gone twenty yards when he “found what darkened de hole!” A
sharp fire was opened on him and his horse killed, but the colonel
himself was unhurt, and mounting a horse brought him by his orderly,
Alex. H. Lamb, he was soon again directing the movements of his men.

Meantime, aware of the danger in front, Maj. Cloud had gone back to
Sturgis for reinforcements and obtained two guns of Totten’s battery,
under Lieut. Sokalski. These came up in good time. As they stopped,
Capt. Chenoweth, of the 1st Kansas, rode out to the head of the ravine,
and saw the Confederates coming up it in considerable numbers. Cloud and
Sokalski got the guns in position and opened on the ravine. As the
Confederates approached nearer Col. Blair ordered the men to lie down
and load and fire in that position and to be careful of their
ammunition. Here the men received a most terrific fire, which they
seemed to relish. Artillery and musketry were playing on them, but the
shot and shell went too high and only the grape, the muskets, and the
rifles of the enemy did execution. Yet not a man broke ranks or left his
place in the line. At last the Confederates fell back or slackened their
fire and the artillery limbered up and retired to the rear to join in
the general retreat, which bad been ordered some minutes before.

Maj. Sturgis, on assuming command after Lyon had fallen, sent Col. Blair
word to retreat as soon as he could do so with safety, and after the
Confederates had fallen back the last time he did so. The men were
brought off in good order and in slow time, without a panic or
confusion. After crossing the first ravine in the rear the line was
reformed and marched by the right flank to the main command and off the
battle field.

The loss of the 2d Kansas in the battle was 5 killed, 59 wounded, and 6
missing—total, 70. Both officers and men behaved splendidly. When Col.
Mitchell fell he turned over the command to Col. Blair, saying:
“Colonel, take the regiment and maintain the honor of Kansas.” As he was
being carried from the field he called out to Gordon Granger, of
Sturgis’ staff, “For God’s sake, support my regiment.” Of Lieut. Col.
Blair, it was said by Gen. Sturgis that “he attracted the attention of
all who saw him.” Col. Mitchell, Lieut. Col. Blair and Maj. Cloud were
all highly complimented by Gen. Sturgis and Gen. Fremont and recommended
for promotion. Maj. Cloud, Adjutant Lines and Capt. Ayres were mentioned
in Col. Blair’s report as conspicuous for their gallantry.


                           TOTTEN’S BATTERY.

The share of fighting done by this organization (Light Company F, 2d
Artillery), in the battle of Wilson’s Creek was large and important.
Soon after the skirmishers of Lyon’s advance fired on the Southern
pickets, the line of march, as directed by Gen. Lyon in person, lay
through a small valley which debouched into that through which Wilson’s
Creek runs at the point immediately occupied by the front of Price’s
troops and just where a road to Springfield entered the valley, keeping
along the foot of the hills, and soon after the battery opened. The left
section, under Lieut. Sokalski, was first brought to bear upon the enemy
in the woods in front, and shortly afterward the other four pieces were
thrown forward into battery to the right on higher ground. A few rounds
from the artillery assisted the infantry in driving the secession troops
back toward the crests of the hills, nearer and immediately over their
own camp.

Capt. Totten now conducted the battery up the hill to the left and
front, and soon found a position where he brought it into battery
directly over the northern position of the enemy’s camp. The camp of
Gen. Rains’ division lay directly beneath the front and to the left of,
though very close to, the position of the battery, while a battery of
the secessionists (Woodruff’s Arkansas) was in front and within easy
range. Of course Rains’ camp was entirely deserted, and therefore
Totten’s first efforts were directed against the Arkansas battery in his
front and right. The right half of Totten’s guns were principally
directed against Woodruff, although the entire six pieces as opportunity
offered, played upon him. The two batteries pounded away on each other
for some time, neither seeming to get much the advantage of the other.
As the position of the Arkansas battery was somewhat masked by the
timber, Totten’s gunners were obliged to give direction to their pieces
by the flash and smoke of the opposing artillery.

In the meantime, while this fight between Totten and Woodruff was in
progress, the battle was raging in the thick woods and underbrush to the
front and right of the position of the Federal battery, and the 1st
Missouri was being hard pressed.

Gen. Lyon ordered Totten to move a section of his battery forward to the
support of the Missourians, which was done, the guns coming up on a run
and unlimbering in front of the right company of the regiment. A
Confederate regiment with a Confederate flag, which at that distance
seemed to be the stars and stripes, was two hundred yards away, and
fearing they might be friends Totten hesitated before opening. Their
fire soon undeceived him and he turned loose his guns upon them with
canister from both pieces.

The next important step in the progress of the battle was when a portion
of Clark’s (?) division tried to force its way up the neighborhood road
passing along toward Springfield in order to turn the Federal right. For
a time the situation was critical, for the Missourians were plucky and
were fighting hard. Four pieces of Totten’s battery were still in
position commanding that point, and Dubois’ four guns were on the left
also near the road and commanding it. As Slack’s men came in good view
and range, both artillery and infantry opened on them and drove them
back.

Just after this had been done Gen. Lyon came up to the battery and
complimented the men who were working it. Capt. Totten saw blood
trickling from Lyon’s heel and the general said he had been wounded in
the leg, but not seriously. The captain offered his commander some
brandy in a canteen, but the general refused it, and rode away, and that
was the last time Totten ever saw Lyon alive. Soon after leaving Totten,
Lyon sent him word to support the Kansas men on the extreme right, who
were being hard pressed. Lieut. Sokalski took up his section immediately
and saved the Kansans from being overthrown and driven back.

After this came an attempted charge on the Federal position by some
Missouri, Texas and Arkansas cavalry, of which there was a great
abundance. Some 800 of them, including a battalion or so of Greer’s
Texans and Carroll’s Arkansans, fresh from the southern end of the
little valley where Sigel had been so easily whipped, formed at the foot
of the hill on which four of Totten’s guns stood and were getting ready
for a charge, when the artillery and the infantry opened on them and
they were driven away so rapidly that they were out of sight in a
moment.

The last point where the battery was engaged was on the right of the
left wing of the 1st Iowa and somewhat in front. Lyon was then killed
and Sturgis was preparing to retreat. Totten’s battery was still in
action, two pieces in advance on the right so hot that the water thrown
on them almost hissed, and yet pounding away. The left wing of the 1st
Iowa came up and supported the guns from the field, and they were
brought away off the field and to Springfield, without the loss of a
sponge-stick. The battery lost 4 killed and 7 wounded; no prisoners.


                            DUBOIS’ BATTERY.

This battery so named consisted of four pieces of light artillery, three
six-pounders, and one twelve-pounder, commanded by second Lieutenant
John V. Dubois, of the U. S. Mounted Rifles, a semi-cavalry regiment.
Lieut. Dubois had been detailed from his regiment to command this
battery, newly organized and manned by recruits.

Entering the fight Dubois selected his own position, some 80 yards to
the left and rear of Totten’s battery, where his men were partially and
his horses entirely protected from the enemy’s fire. He assisted Totten
in clearing the ground of the enemy at the start, and under direction of
Capt. Gordon Granger (afterward a major general), opened on McCulloch’s
men down in Ray’s cornfield, who had just driven back Plummer, and drove
them in disorder, Capt. Granger directing one of the guns. The
Confederates rallied behind a house (J. A. Ray’s), on the right of their
line. Dubois struck this house twice with a twelve-pound shot, when a
hospital flag was displayed and he ceased firing. Using small charges of
powder, Dubois’ guns now shelled the thicket in the ravine, a short
distance in front, and forced some of Price’s Missourians to retire.

Bledsoe’s battery now opened on Dubois from the crest of the hill
opposite and “Old Hi’s” fire did great execution. “Old Sacramento,” as
Bledsoe’s twelve-pounder was called, got in her work very
disadvantageously to the Federals. The shots passing over Dubois’ gun
fell among the Federal wounded that had been carried to the rear and did
considerable execution. Dubois could not entirely silence Capt.
Bledsoe’s guns, but he made it very uncomfortable for him. One shot from
Dubois’ gun, killed two of Bledsoe’s battery horses, tore off one arm
and all of the hand of the other arm of the man who held them, Judge
James Young, now of Lexington, and killed another man far in the rear.
While engaged with Bledsoe and his Lafayette county battery, Lieut.
Dubois assisted in driving back the cavalry that formed to charge on
Totten.

During the last charge of Price and McCulloch on Sturgis, two of Dubois’
guns were limbered up to be sent to Totten, but before a road could be
opened through the brush and through the wounded, orders came for Dubois
to fall back to a hill in the rear and protect a retreat. This he did,
remaining until all the troops had passed when he turned and marched
toward the rear. Shortly after starting back the twelve-pounder broke
down. While it was being repaired Maj. Osterhaus’s two companies
remained with it to protect it, and then followed in its rear until the
main portion of the command on the prairie was reached. Here the battery
joined Steele’s battalion and formed the rear guard the rest of the way
into Springfield, neither firing or receiving a shot on the way and not
being molested in anywise—never seeing an enemy. Being well protected
during the entire engagement, the loss in this battery was very
slight—none killed and only two severely wounded. Several of the men and
Dubois himself received slight wounds.


                          STEELE’S BATTALION.

The battalion of regulars commanded by Capt. Fred Steele was composed of
two companies of the 2d regular infantry—company B, commanded by Sergt.
Griffin, and company C, commanded by Sergt. McLaughlin, a company of
“general service” recruits under Lieut. M. L. Lothrop, and a company of
mounted rifle recruits commanded by Lance-Sergeant Morine. It will be
seen that Capt. Steele had but one _commissioned_ officer under him.

During the early part of the action the battalion was in position to
support Dubois’ battery, but had no opportunity of engaging the enemy
except to assist in dispersing a body of cavalry that threatened the
rear. Soon after the fall of Gen. Lyon, Capt. Gilbert’s company joined
the battalion and Maj. Sturgis ordered Capt. Steele to form in line of
battle and advance against the enemy’s front. Heavy firing on both sides
followed, without any apparent permanent advantage to either, until the
suspension of hostilities mentioned before. During this suspension
Lieut. Lothrop took his company forward as skirmishers, but they were
driven back in very short order and without much ceremony.

A Confederate field piece (probably one of Guibor’s), was run up under
the hill and threw grape and occasionally a shell over Steele’s
battalion, but with no serious effect, as the shots passed too high. Two
other pieces were added and worked vigorously but not carefully, and
with no other effect than to cause Steele’s men to lie close to the
ground.

In the last grand charge on Totten’s battery and the main Federal
position, Steele’s battalion did good work, the men firing away nearly
all their cartridges. Just before the retreat began Capt. Gordon, with
his hastily collected detachment from different regiments, and Capt.
Steele repulsed another attack, and enabled Totten’s battery and other
commands to retire in good order. On the retreat to Springfield after
reaching the prairie Capt. Steele commanded the rear guard, and states
that he was not molested at all, “never seeing an enemy.” The loss of
Steele’s battalion was 15 killed, 44 wounded, and two prisoners. Sergt.
Morine, commanding the rifle recruits, was killed on the field.


                          PLUMMER’S BATTALION.

This battalion performed brave service at the battle of Wilson’s Creek.
It belonged to the 1st U. S. Regular Infantry, and most of the men had
been some time in the service. Frequent reference has already been made
to the part it performed in this battle. Gilbert’s company had the
advance upon reaching the battlefield and was the first thrown forward
on the skirmish line. The principal portion of the battalion, commanded
by Capt. J. N. Plummer himself, made the fight in Ray’s cornfield
against the 3d Louisiana and 2d Arkansas Mounted Rifles, and afterward
engaged in the terrible conflict on and along Bloody Hill.

The battalion was remarked as much for its coolness as for its bravery.
Upon the retreat of the Federals to Springfield it entered the town in
perfect order, the flag flying, the drums beating, and the men keeping
perfect step as if they were on parade or drill, and as collected and
unexcited as if nothing of consequence had taken place that day.

The battalion was composed of Cos. B, C and D, of the 1st Regulars,
commanded by, respectively, Capts. Gilbert, Plummer, and Huston, and
Lieut. Wood’s squad of Rifle Recruits. Capts. Plummer and Gilbert were
severely wounded, and Capt. D. Huston then took command. Out of 230 men
engaged, the battalion lost 19 killed, 52 wounded and 9 missing—a total
of 80, or a little more than one-third of the entire number in the
fight.


                            THE HOME GUARDS.

Two companies of mounted Union home guards—one called the Dade county
squadron, commanded by Capt. Clark W. Wright, and the other under Capt.
T. A. Switzler—were present at the battle, but took no very important
part. They made some charges on scattered squads of secessionists,
driving them under cover and out of all danger to the Federal line, but
for the greater portion of the time they were stationed to the right and
rear of Lyon’s position as a post of observation and to prevent the line
from being flanked by the enemy’s cavalry. In one of the charges Capts.
Wright and Switzler ascended a hill in plain view of Gen. Rains’ camp,
and counted a number of tents.


                 DISPOSITION OF THE BODY OF GEN. LYON.

  Ah, Sir Launcelot. Thou there liest that never wert matched of earthly
  hands. Thou wert the fairest person and the goodliest of any that rode
  in the press of knights. Thou wert the truest to thy sworn brother of
  any that buckled on the spur; * * * and thou wert the sternest knight
  to thy mortal foe that ever laid spear in rest.

For the purpose of ascertaining the truth concerning the death and
burial of the body of Gen. Lyon, the writer hereof caused certain
newspaper publications to be made in the St. Louis _Republican_ and
other journals, making inquiries pertinent to the case. Many and varied
were the replies, some of which, perhaps, ought to be given, as
illustrating the different lights in which men see the same object, and
the morbid desire for notoriety on the part of others, which leads them
to lie like book-agents, in order that their names may be published in
connection with some notable event. No less than ten newspaper articles
were published and thirty-two written communications were received by
the compiler relating to the death and burial of Gen. Lyon. The result
was forty-two different versions thereof.

The work of ascertaining the truth was thereby complicated instead of
being facilitated. A dozen or more claimants for the distinction of
having first discovered the body on the battlefield appeared. Half a
score bore the corpse to Gen. Price’s tent. Twenty saw the body, noted
its appearance carefully, etc. Knowing from incontrovertible proof how
the general was dressed when he was killed, the writer inserted a test
question asking that his garb be described. Two ex-officers, one Union,
the other Confederate, answered that he was “in full general’s uniform.”
A minister of the gospel, who was also the “_first_ to discover the
body,” promptly replied that he was “dressed in a complete suit of black
broadcloth, white shirt, gold studs, fine boots and kid gloves!” The
majority of the answers, however, were to the same effect, that he was
dressed in his old fatigue uniform of his former rank—that of captain in
the regular army—without epaulettes or shoulder-straps. After much
labored investigation the writer has ascertained the following facts,
which he can easily substantiate:—

Gen. Lyon was killed while placing the 2d Kansas Infantry in position,
by a rifle or navy revolver ball through the region of the heart. He was
borne to the rear by Lieut. Schreyer, of Capt. Tholen’s company, 2d
Kansas, two other members of the same regiment, and Ed. Lehman, of Co.
B, 1st U. S. Cavalry, the latter the soldier who caught the general’s
body as it fell from the horse. As the body was borne to the rear,
Lieut. Wm. Wherry, one of the general’s aides, had the face covered, and
ordered Lehman, who was crying like a child, to “stop his noise,” and
tried in other ways to suppress the news that the general had been
killed. The body was placed in the shade of a small black-jack, the face
covered with half of a soldier’s blanket, the limbs composed, and in a
few minutes there were present Surgeon F. M. Cornyn, Maj. Sturgis, Maj.
Schofield, Gen. Sweeney, and Gordon Granger, and perhaps other officers.
Cornyn examined the body, and from the side of the face wiped the blood
made by the wound in the head. He also opened the vest and split the
general’s shirts, which were soaked with blood, and examined the wound,
which was found to be in the heart, the aorta having been pierced. The
minister’s story, which he has the effrontery to give a newspaper
publication, relates that two or three hours afterward the body was
neatly dressed, with its smooth _white_ shirt and studs, kid gloves,
etc.! Those best acquainted with the personal habits of Gen. Lyon say he
never wore a pair of _kid_ gloves during his term of service.

Maj. Sturgis ordered the body to be carried back to a place selected as
a sort of field hospital and there to be placed in an ambulance and
taken to Springfield. While the body was here lying a few Federal
officers examined it and one of them reports that the face had again
become bloody, from the wound in the head, and that the shirt front was
gory from the death wound. About twenty minutes after the body had been
brought back, Lieut. David Murphy, of the 1st Missouri, who was already
badly wounded in the leg, and Lehman placed the body in an army wagon,
being used as an ambulance, and belonging to Co. B, 1st U. S. Cavalry.
This wagon was about to start to Springfield, and contained already some
wounded men. A few minutes later a sergeant of the regular army came up
and ordered the body taken out, saying, “There will be an ambulance here
in a minute for it.” The corpse was then carried beneath the shade tree
where it had before reposed.

The Federal army now retreated, and the ambulance ordered never came up.
Before the Confederates came on to the ground where the body lay, which
location was 200 yards northeast of “Bloody Hill,” half a dozen slightly
wounded Federal soldiers had gathered about the dead hero, and an hour
after the Federal retreat a party of Arkansas skirmishers came upon them
and discovering the occasion of the crowd instantly spread the news that
Gen. Lyon had been killed. Immediately there was a great tumult and the
report was borne to Price and McCulloch by half a dozen. Many were
incredulous and did not believe that a body so plainly dressed—in an
old, faded captain’s uniform, with but three U. S. buttons on the coat
and a blue (or red) cord down the legs of the trousers to indicate that
he was in the military service—was that of Gen. Lyon.

The body was then placed in a small covered wagon, used as an ambulance,
to be conveyed to Gen. McCulloch’s headquarters (not Gen. Price’s) when
an order arrived that it should be taken to Price’s and delivered to Dr.
S. H. Melcher, of the 5th Missouri, who, as before stated, had come upon
the field in company with Dr. Smith, Gen. Rains’ division surgeon. Dr.
Melcher had been informed by Col. Emmett McDonald that Lyon had been
killed, and at once asked for his body. When the little covered wagon
containing the corpse had driven up and Gen. Price and Gen. Rains and
other officers had viewed the body, it was turned over to Dr. Melcher. A
number of Southern soldiers standing by drew knives and made attempts to
cut off some buttons or pieces of the uniform as relics, and one or two
expressed a wish to “cut his d——d heart out;” but Gen. Rains drew his
sword (or revolver) and swore he would kill the first man that touched
the corpse, and Emmett McDonald denounced the ruffianly would-be
violators in the harshest terms—and McDonald could be harsh when he
wanted to be!

Beside the body of Gen. Lyon was a wounded man, who was now taken out,
and then Gen. Rains himself and some of his cavalry escorted the wagon
to the house of Mr. Ray, on or near the battlefield. It is proper now to
give the testimony of Dr. Melcher himself, as given to the writer and
furnished the press for publication. Speaking of the courtesy of Gen.
Rains in escorting the body to Ray’s house, Dr. Melcher goes on to say:

  Arriving there the body was carried into the house and placed on a
  bed; then I carefully washed his face and hands, which were much
  discolored by dust and blood, and examined for wounds. There was a
  wound on the right side of the head, another in the right leg below
  the knee, and another, which caused his death, was by a small rifle
  ball, which entered about the fourth rib on the left side, passing
  entirely through the body, making its exit from the right side,
  evidently passing through both lungs and heart. From the character of
  this wound it is my opinion that Gen. Lyon was holding the bridle rein
  in his left hand, and had turned in the saddle to give a command, or
  words of encouragement, thus exposing his left side to the fire of the
  enemy.

  At this time he had on a dark blue, single breasted captain’s coat,
  with the buttons used by the regular army of the United States. It was
  the same uniform coat I had frequently seen him wear in the arsenal at
  St. Louis, and was considerably worn and faded. He had no
  shoulder-straps; his pants were dark blue; the wide-brim felt hat he
  had worn during the campaign was not with him. After arranging the
  body as well as circumstances permitted, it was carried to the wagon
  and covered with a spread or sheet furnished me by Mrs. Ray.

  When I was ready to start Gen. Rains said: “I will not order any to go
  with you, but volunteers may go;” and _five Confederate soldiers_
  offered their service of escort. One drove the team; the others, being
  mounted, rode with me in rear of wagon. The only name I can give is
  that of Orderly Sergt. Brackett of a company in Churchill’s Arkansas
  regiment. Another of the escort was a German who in 1863 was clerking
  in Springfield, and during the defence of Springfield against the
  attack of Marmaduke, January 8, 1863, did service in the citizens’
  company of 42 men which was attached to my “Quinine Brigade” from the
  hospitals.

  The following is a copy of a paper written at Mr. Ray’s house. The
  original I now have:—[14]

  Gen. James S. Rains, commanding Missouri State Guards, having learned
  that Gen. Lyon, commanding United States forces during action near
  Springfield, Mo., Aug. 10, 1861, had fallen, kindly afforded military
  escort and transportation subject to my order. I have also his
  assurance that all the wounded shall be well taken care of and may be
  removed under the hospital flag, and that the dead shall be buried as
  rapidly as possible.

  [Signed]
                                                          S. H. Melcher,
                                          Asst. Surg. 5th Reg. Mo. Vols.

  Wilson Creek, Aug. 10, 1861.

  _The above fully approved and indorsed._

  [Signed]
                                                         James S. Rains,
                                          Brig.-Gen. 8th M. D., M. S. G.

  About half way to Springfield I saw a party under flag of truce going
  toward the battlefield. Arriving at Springfield, the first officer I
  reported to was the ever faithful Col. Nelson Cole, then captain of
  company E, 1st Missouri Volunteer Infantry, who, with what remained of
  his gallant company, was guarding the outposts. I passed on to the
  camps of Gen. James Totten and T. W. Sweeney. Here Gen. Totten
  relieved my escort and sent them back to their command, a new driver
  was furnished, and I delivered the body of Gen. Lyon to Maj. J. M.
  Schofield, 1st Missouri Volunteer Infantry—now Maj.-Gen. Schofield, U.
  S. A.—at the house that had been used previous to the battle by Gen.
  Lyon for his headquarters.

It is proper to state that Dr. Melcher’s testimony is corroborated in
part by two survivors of the 1st Arkansas, and by Mrs. Livonia Green,
now of Lane county, Oregon, and also by Mrs. Jerome Yarbrough, of this
county, both of the latter being daughters of the Mr. and Mrs. Ray
mentioned. (Mr. and Mrs. Ray are now dead.)

After Sturgis’ army had gotten well on the road to Springfield, it was
discovered that Gen. Lyon’s body had been left behind. Sturgis
immediately started back a flag of truce party under Lieut. Canfield, of
the regular army, with orders to go to Gens. Price and McCulloch, and,
if possible, procure the remains and bring them on to Springfield.
Lieut. Canfield and party went to the battle field, saw Gen. McCulloch,
obtained his order for the body (the general remarking that he wished he
had a thousand other dead Yankee bodies to send off) and there
ascertained that the body had already started for the Federal lines.

When the corpse was deposited in the former headquarters of the general,
on the north side of College street, west of Main, in Springfield, word
was sent to Sturgis. He and Schofield and other officers held a
consultation, and decided that the body should be taken with the army to
Rolla, if possible. There not being a metallic coffin in the place, it
was determined to embalm it, or preserve it by some artificial process.
Accordingly, the chief surgeon, Dr. E. C. Franklin, was sent for.
Responding to the inquiries of the writer, Dr. Franklin says:—

  About ten o’clock p. m., on the night when it arrived at head
  quarters, I was summoned there and then first saw the body of Gen.
  Lyon lying upon a table, covered with a white spread, in a room
  adjoining the one where two or three of the Union officers were
  seated. Gens. Schofield, Sturgis, and others consulted me as to the
  possibility of injecting the body with such materials that would
  prevent decay during its transit to St. Louis. I prepared the fluid
  for injection into the body, but discovered that instead of being
  retained within the vessels it passed out into the cavity of the
  chest. This led me to suspect a laceration either of one of the large
  arteries near the heart, or, possibly, a wound of the heart itself.
  This hypothesis, coupled with the fact that there was an external
  wound in the region of the heart, confirmed my opinion of the utter
  uselessness of attempting the preservation of the body during its
  passage to St. Louis. These facts I reported to the commanding
  officer, who then gave me verbal orders to attend to the disposal of
  the body in the best possible manner. At this time preparations were
  being made and the orders given for the troops to retreat and fall
  back upon Rolla, some fifty or more miles nearer St. Louis. Returning
  to the general hospital, of which I was in charge, I detailed a squad
  of nurses to watch by the body of Gen. Lyon till morning, which order
  was faithfully carried out. I then disposed of my time for the best
  interests of the wounded and sick under my charge.

Dr. Franklin was furnished with money and directed to have the general’s
remains well cared for, and he ordered an undertaker, Mr. Presley Beal,
to make a good, substantial coffin at once. Early the following morning,
in some way, word was sent to Mrs. Mary Phelps, wife of Hon. John S.
Phelps, that the body of the great Union leader was lying stiff, and
bloody, and neglected in the temporary charnel house on College street.
Soon she and the wife of Mr. Beal were by his side, and watching him.
Not long thereafter came the wife of Col. Marcus Boyd and her two
daughters (one of whom, now Mrs. Lula Kennedy, still resides in
Springfield), and kept them company. And so it was that women, “last at
the cross and first at the tomb,” were those who kept vigil over the
corse of the dead warrior, who, although he died the earliest, was one
of the greatest Union generals the war produced.

The body had now lain about twenty-four hours in very hot weather. It
was changing fast, and its condition made it necessary that it should be
buried as soon as possible. Mrs. Phelps left Mrs. Boyd and her daughters
and went to see about the coffin. Dr. Franklin came in and sprinkled the
corpse with bay rum and alcohol. Mr. Beal brought the coffin, and soon a
wagon—a butcher’s wagon—was on its way to Col. Phelps’ farm with all
that was mortal of the dead hero, and with no escort save the driver,
Mrs. Phelps, Mr. Beal and one or two soldiers.

Col. Emmett McDonald, than whom the war produced no more knightly a
soldier, had been made a prisoner by Gen. Lyon, at the capture of Camp
Jackson. When Lyon was killed, Col. McDonald not only assisted Dr.
Melcher in recovering the body, but Dr. Franklin says of him:—

  Here let me do justice to Col. Emmett McDonald, who called upon me at
  the general hospital and after some conversation in regard to the
  circumstances attending the death of Gen. Lyon, tendered to me an
  escort of Confederate troops as a “guard of honor” to accompany Gen.
  Lyon’s remains to the place of burial, which I refused from a too
  sensitive regard for the painful occasion, and an ignorance of
  military regulations touching the subject.

Mrs. Phelps was practically alone at the time. Her husband was in his
seat in the Federal Congress, her son, John E. Phelps, had followed off
the Federal army, and even her faithful servant, George, had accompanied
his young master. But Mrs. Phelps was a lady not easily daunted, or one
that would shrink from what she considered a duty, no matter how
unpleasant it might be. The body was taken to Mrs. Phelps’ residence,
and not buried at once, it being the understanding that it would be sent
for soon. Mr. James Vaughan, who owned a tin-shop in Springfield, was
ordered to make a zinc case for the coffin, to assist in the
preservation of its contents.

The coffin was temporarily deposited in an out-door cellar or cave,
which in summer had been used as an ice-house, and in the winter as an
“apple-hole,” and was well covered with straw. It was here placed about
two o’clock on the 11th. A day or two later, the slave, George,
returned. While the body of Gen. Lyon lay in Mrs. Phelps’ cellar, the
place was visited by some citizens and many Southern soldiers. It is
much to be regretted that some brutes there were among the soldiers that
treated the remains of the dead man with all disrespect, cursing them
and him openly and in the vilest terms. One young officer is reported to
have said to Mrs. Phelps: “There is quite a contrast betwixt the resting
place of old Lyon’s body and his soul, isn’t there, Madame? The one is
in an ice-house; the other in hell!” he added with a heartless chuckle.

At last some drunken ruffians, by threatening to open the coffin and
“cut the d—d heart” of the body for a relic, so frightened Mrs. Phelps,
causing her to fear that the remains would be mutilated in some horrible
manner, that she asked Gen. Price to send a detail and bury the body.
This was done by volunteers from Guibor’s and Kelly’s infantry, of Gen.
Parsons’ division, at that time encamped on Col. Phelps’ farm. It is
believed the body was not _buried_ until the 14th. The slave, George,
dug the grave, which was in Mrs. Phelps’ garden. Some of the soldiers
stamped on the grave in great delight. An Irishman told Capt. Guibor,
“Be jabers, we shtomped him good.”

On the 22d of August there came to Springfield a party in a four-mule
ambulance, bearing with them a 300-pound metallic coffin. This party was
composed of Danford Knowlton, of New York City, a cousin of Gen. Lyon;
John B. Hasler, of Webster, Mass., the general’s brother-in-law, and Mr.
Geo. N. Lynch, the well-known undertaker, still of St. Louis. From Rolla
in, the party was accompanied by the gallant Emmett McDonald, who had
been up to arrange for an exchange of prisoners, and from whom, Mr.
Hasler says, they received many attentions and favors.

Arriving at Springfield, Mr. Hasler says, they visited Gen. Price and
handed him a letter from Gen. Fremont explaining their mission, which
was to bear the body of Gen. Lyon. As the letter was directed “To whom
it may concern,” Gen. Price, after glancing at the address, threw it
contemptuously aside, saying he could read no document thus directed. At
the same time he offered to grant them every facility for procuring the
body of their dead relative.

Repairing to Phelps’ farm the party disinterred the body and placed it
in the metallic coffin, after removing the zinc case made by Mr. Vaughn.
Gen. Parsons, whose division was encamped on the farm, came up,
introduced himself, and Mr. Hasler says, “showed us numerous civilities.
Among other attentions, he tendered a guard for the body and team over
night, which was accepted.”

The next day the party left Springfield and were in Rolla on the 25th
and in St. Louis the 26th. Here a military escort joined. From thence
the party proceeded to Eastford, Connecticut, the birthplace of the
general, which place was reached September 4th, there being great
receptions and honors paid the body in the cities and towns _en route_.
September 5th the body was buried in the family burying ground at
Eastford. “Upon the coffin, as it lay in the Congregational church when
the funeral ceremonies were being rendered,” says Mr. Woodward, who was
present, “were placed the hat, a light felt, which the general had waved
aloft when rallying his ranks at Wilson’s Creek, and also the sword,
scarred and weather-beaten from sharing in the long hard service of its
owner.” The hat was brought from the battlefield by the wounded men in
the wagon in which the general’s body was first placed, and was given to
Mr. Hasler by the driver, who had preserved it. Both hat and sword were
given to, and since have been in the possession of the Connecticut
Historical Society.

Gen. Lyon was born in Eastford, Connecticut, July 14, 1818. He entered
West point in 1837; graduated in 1841, standing eleventh in a class of
fifty. He served in Florida in 1841-2; was in the Mexican war under
Taylor and Scott; in California and on the frontier from 1850 to 1861.
He was never married. The statement that he bequeathed his private
fortune to the Federal government is erroneous.




                               FOOTNOTES


[1]The fight at Dug Springs was called by some of the Confederate
    officers, derisively, “Rains’ Scare.”

[2]The following is a literal copy of the memorandum given to Col.
    Phelps by Gen. Lyon, when the former left Springfield. Lyon
    instructed Phelps to give this to Fremont: “_Memorandum for Col.
    Phelps_.—See General Fremont about troops and stores for this place.
    Our men have not been paid and are rather dispirited; they are badly
    off for clothing and the want of shoes unfits them for marching.
    Some staff officers are badly needed, and the interests of the
    government suffer for the want of them. The time of the three months
    volunteers is nearly out, and on their returning home my command
    will be reduced too low for effective operations. Troops must at
    once be forwarded to supply their place. The safety of the State is
    hazarded. Orders from Gen. Scott strip the entire West of regular
    forces and increase the chances of sacrificing it. The public press
    is full of reports that troops from other States are moving toward
    the northern border of Arkansas for the purpose of invading
    Missouri.
                                                _Springfield, July 27._”

[3]From statements of two prominent Union men of Greene county who were
    present.

[4]Afterward Major General in command of the Federal troops in Arkansas.

[5]Gen. Sweeney said: “Let us eat the last bit of mule flesh and fire
    the last cartridge before we think of retreating.”

[6]There are grounds for stating that Lyon knew of the intended attack
    upon him within four hours after it had been agreed upon, receiving
    his information through one of his spies, actually a commissioned
    officer in the Missouri State Guard!

[7]It must be borne in mind that the Confederate line extended in a
    general direction from the north to the south along Wilson’s Creek;
    that Lyon attacked the northern end from the west and northwest,
    while Sigel was stationed at the southern end, over a mile away.

[8]Afterward Major General and in command of this department.

[9]Which was done near Mr. Robinson’s.

[10]It was not Totten’s battery, but Reid’s Confederate battery, from
    Ft. Smith, Ark. It was well supplied with grape from the Little Rock
    arsenal.—Compiler.

[11]Since Governor of Arkansas.

[12]At the breaking out of the civil war, the color of the infantry
    uniform of the U. S. army was gray. Upon its adoption by the
    Confederates this color was changed, and blue substituted.

[13]Gen. A. E. Steen’s division seems to have been attached to
    McCulloch’s army. It was insignificant in numbers.

[14]The writer has seen and carefully examined the original of this
    paper. It is written in pencil, but is quite legible. The
    handwriting of Gen. Rains was identified beyond question. The paper
    was kindly furnished by Dr. Melcher for the purposes of this
    history.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

—Created a Table of Contents based on the chapter headings.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ACCOUNT OF THE BATTLE OF WILSON'S CREEK, OR OAK HILLS, FOUGHT BETWEEN THE UNION TROOPS, COMMANDED BY GEN. N. LYON AND THE SOUTHERN, OR CONFEDERATE TROOPS, UNDER COMMAND OF GENS. MCCULLOCH AND PRICE, ON SATURDAY, AUGUST 10, 1861, IN GREENE COUNTY, MISSOURI ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.