THE
                             ALDINE SPELLER

                                PART ONE
                         FOR GRADES ONE AND TWO

                                   BY
                           CATHERINE T. BRYCE
                   ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
                           MINNEAPOLIS, MINN.
                                   AND
                            FRANK J. SHERMAN
                   FORMERLY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
                              MONSON, MASS.

                             [Illustration]

                                NEW YORK
                            NEWSON & COMPANY

                           COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY
                            NEWSON & COMPANY.

                         _All rights reserved._




PREFACE


To teachers and the public alike, probably no subject taught in
the public schools has been more disappointing than spelling. This
disappointment is undoubtedly due to:

1. Defective material for study and poor methods of teaching;

2. Too much testing and too little teaching;

3. Finding errors rather than preventing them;

4. The use of a theoretical, rather than the practical, vocabulary of
children and adults.

The teaching of spelling must be done from a spelling book in the hands
of the children, since the individual teacher does not have the time to
prepare lists of words which will produce as good results as the lists
given in a spelling book, the selection and preparation of which are the
result of years of special observation and testing.

A plan of teaching spelling to secure the best results should consist of
a thoughtful, systematic, and comprehensive presentation of the words and
spelling facts which every pupil must learn. It must contain an adequate
and simple system of phonics for the primary grades, since a large
percentage of the words in common use are purely phonetic and present no
spelling difficulties once a sane and practical phonetic foundation is
fixed. It must have a vocabulary selected and graded with such care that
it will give the child the ability to spell correctly those words which
he needs to use in his written work, and that it will also develop and
broaden his vocabulary for his future needs. It should contain suitable
directions and hints to the teacher, sufficiently removed from the
pupil’s text so that he may not be confused by them. It may, and in many
grades should, contain information and suggestions to the pupil that will
help him to master the many peculiarly non-phonetic words which present
their individual problems and must be individually mastered. It should
contain a very few of the most important spelling rules simply stated.
It should contain a large variety of sentences for dictation, which
may wisely take the form of gems of thought. Such a plan, well taught,
constantly supplemented by the teacher with such words as the peculiar
difficulties of individual pupils and classes may require, will produce a
maximum of ability to spell correctly.

In the Aldine Speller the authors have presented a plan of teaching
which in actual results has proved singularly effective. The vocabulary
has been selected and graded with unusual care to meet the actual needs
of life and to develop a spelling sense. In its preparation a careful
comparison was made of the vocabularies of several of the most popular
spelling books of the day in respect to both gradation and selection.
Paralleling this, the various recent tests and investigations, notably
those of Ayres, Jones, and Cook and O’Shea, have been checked. The
resulting vocabulary is thought to represent the real writing vocabulary
of the average child of the grade in which it is taught. Special and
repeated drills are given on the real trouble makers—the one hundred
and more words that comprise four-fifths of the misspelled words of the
schoolroom.

In the primary grades use is made of exceptionally valuable phonetic
lists. Emphasis is placed upon this important and very practical
foundation for the development of a spelling sense, and its mastery in
the primary grades will do much to train children to spell correctly. A
few comparatively uncommon words are used in these lists chiefly for the
value of the phonetic drill.

As every error creates a tendency, and if repeated quickly establishes
a habit, it is important that the correct spelling of words be taught
before children have occasion to write them. Every worth-while test and
investigation shows the most common and most useful words in our language
to be the words used early by children. It is likewise certain that very
many of the misspelled words are one-syllable words in very common use.
It would, therefore, seem essential that the real teaching of spelling
should be done as early as possible in the grades—somewhat earlier than
has frequently been the case—that correct habits, rather than incorrect
ones, may be formed.

Obligation is expressed to Dr. Leonard P. Ayres of the Russell Sage
Foundation for kind permission to make use of his list of “The Thousand
Commonest Words.” These and some four thousand other very common and
important words constitute the Aldine vocabulary.

That the Aldine Speller may lead to some real teaching, and decrease
“lesson hearing,” is the hope of the authors.




DIRECTIONS TO TEACHERS


ORAL SPELLING

Oral spelling should always precede written spelling in the primary
grades. Careful and distinct pronunciation by the child should always
precede oral spelling. Children cannot be expected to spell correctly
words that they cannot pronounce. It is well to emphasize the form of a
word of more than one syllable by syllabication. It makes the spelling
more obvious, promotes clear enunciation, and assists in creating a
correct mental picture of the word. The sight words in this book are so
syllabicated when first presented. A slight pause between the syllables
is usually sufficient in oral spelling. In writing the words they should
not be divided.


TESTING

The mere “hearing” of spelling lessons is happily a thing of the past in
most schools. However, teachers cannot be too strongly impressed with
the worthlessness of such exercises. The primary object is to instruct,
not to examine—to teach to spell correctly, not to find out how many
words may be spelled incorrectly. Review lessons are frequently given,
and these are sufficient for test purposes. All other lessons should be
thoroughly taught with instruction the aim and object of the lesson.


CORRELATION WITH PHONICS

The best possible preparation for teaching to spell is thoughtful,
intelligent drill in phonics. As all modern methods of teaching reading
give systematic phonic drills, and thus most children have had some
preparation before spelling is begun, the phonetic lists in this book
will be found to be easy. Not only will they be easy, if intelligently
taught, but they will serve the double purpose of teaching the children
to spell intelligently and independently, and of enabling them to
recognize new words. In other words, the right kind of phonetic teaching
may be made of great educative value, teaching at the same time both
spelling and reading. Thoughtful consideration will show the teacher
that a large proportion of words are strictly phonetic, i.e. “spell
themselves.” In learning the spelling of one word, if the phonetic
elements have been properly and thoroughly taught, the child is learning
the spelling of all words containing the same phonograms. It is,
therefore, of the utmost importance in the primary grades that a phonetic
sense be developed and utilized.

The lists used in this book are presented first in the text as short
lists, each of which precedes the use of any word of the series in
dictation. On page 61 will be found more complete lists for supplementary
drill. These are numbered in the same order and are similar to those
found on the Aldine Phonic Chart, which the teacher will find to be of
great assistance. Drills on these complete series may well be given
whenever a review or additional lesson is possible. The pupil may study
from his book; quick drills may be given from the Phonic Chart; then a
selected list may be dictated by the teacher. Too much intelligent drill
on these phonic series cannot be given.


INTEREST

It has been well said that “interest is nine-tenths of education.” This
is true in teaching spelling. Any means which will arouse interest in
mastering words is likely to be effective. So far as our forefathers
succeeded in securing results in this subject they did so by the interest
in the old-fashioned “spelling bee.” Spelling matches of various sorts
are desirable for creating interest. The review lists and phonetic lists
will be found admirable for this purpose. It should be remembered,
however, that this is testing what is already learned and is not teaching
something new.


PUPILS’ LISTS

Each pupil has his own difficulties in spelling. Teach him to make
private lists of the words which he finds especially hard to spell and
have him use extra effort to conquer these trouble makers. These may
be listed in the back of his textbook or in his individual notebook.
Occasional lessons may be devoted entirely to this kind of exercise, and
they should be individual and painstaking. Such words should be watched
for in the other written work and misspelling prevented rather than
corrected. Besides making the misspelled words the basis of a lesson
they may well be correctly and carefully written on the board with the
difficulty shown in colored crayon. If possible leave them in sight for
several days.


REVIEWS

Frequent reviews are given, and these should be used to test the
children, to check their accomplishment, and to supply a record of their
individual ability. The lists of “Initial Words of Phonetic Series” at
the end of the work for each grade should be used for the same purpose,
and much valuable reviewing may be done with the Series themselves. The
Phonic Chart is valuable for this purpose.


ALPHABETICAL LIST

That the teacher may know just what words have been taught, an
alphabetical list of all sight words is given at the end of the book.


HOMOPHONES

Words spelled differently but pronounced alike should be kept apart until
the spelling of each has become fixed and the ability to use correctly
in sentences, reasonably sure. Then only may they safely be brought
together for comparison. When this is done, much care must be used that
no confusion may exist in the child’s mind as to the proper use of each.


ORDER OF PRESENTATION

All children do not learn spelling equally well in the same way. Some are
sense-organ learners, while others are largely motor-organ learners. Most
children are both. In all cases the order of seeing words, hearing them
pronounced, pronouncing them, spelling them aloud, and then writing them,
will be found to be most effective. Appeal is thus made successively to
the eye, the ear, the memory, and the hand.


PROPER NAMES

In the first grade the child should be taught to spell his own name.
In the second grade he should be taught the most common names of other
children in the room, the name of the teacher, of the city or town, and
of the state. He should be taught that these names always begin with a
capital letter. Other local names of special importance may be presented
at the discretion of the teacher.




HOW THIS BOOK IS TO BE USED


THE ALPHABET

Page 1

Often the spelling of words is forced upon the child before he has
properly mastered the alphabet. This is the cause of much poor spelling,
much _guessing_ in the primary grades. Before a child is allowed to spell
orally he should be absolutely sure of the name of every letter, and he
should be able to recognize and name it at sight. Before he is allowed to
write one word in a dictated spelling lesson, the pupil should be able to
write any letter of the alphabet from dictation. This means that the real
study of spelling should not be undertaken until the middle of the first
year or later.

Be sure that your pupils know their letters before beginning spelling.
Following are some suggestions for Alphabet drills. Use any that you
think helpful.


ALPHABET DRILLS

1. Have pupils read the alphabet in order, pointing to each letter as it
is named.

2. Have pupils point to the letters in any order as you call them.

In this drill teach them the approximate place of the letters, that is,
to look for _a_, _d_, _c_, _f_, near the beginning; _j_, _n_, _k_, _o_,
near the middle; _t_, _v_, _w_, near the end.

3. Ask such questions as, “What letter comes after _m_? _n_? _d_? _t_?”

4. Consonant Drills.

(_a_) Call a letter and have pupils give the sound.

(_b_) Sound a letter and have pupils give the name.

5. Written Work.

(_a_) Have pupils copy the alphabet in script from print.

(_b_) Have pupils write the alphabet from memory.

(_c_) Dictate the letters in any order and require the pupils to write
them. Time the children in this exercise, encouraging them to write as
rapidly as possible.

6. The Typewriter Game.

Call the alphabet on page 1 of the child’s book the keys of a typewriter.
Have the children spell words, touching the letters as the letter keys.
Dictate as follows: “Write _at_ on your typewriter.” The pupils touch
_a_ and _t_ as they spell aloud. Then dictate _cat_, _bat_, _hat_. Use
phonetic words or words made of letters near together in the alphabet.
The object of the exercise is to find quickly the place of each letter
in the alphabet, as well as to give the ability to quickly recognize the
letters.


A PHONETIC LIST

Page 2, Lesson 1

As may be seen at a glance, this lesson contains five words using the
phonogram _un_.

The directions and suggestions given below for the study of this
particular lesson apply to all similar phonetic lessons in the book.

1. Pronounce each word distinctly, giving its meaning or using it in
a sentence, as, “sun—The sun is shining brightly.” You thus give the
children the word properly used and leave in no pupil’s mind the idea
that you meant _son_. “Fun—Did you have fun at recess time, Tom?” Tom’s
recollection of the recess games will associate the word and its meaning.
“Gun—Who has seen a gun? What is its use? Bun—The baker puts currants in
the bun.” By the variety of ways in which you give or suggest the meaning
of the word, try to arouse the pupil’s interest in the word itself. Never
require a pupil to study the spelling of a word until he has heard it
properly pronounced and knows the meaning.

2. Have the pupils read the words, pronouncing each correctly. The
children may give original sentences, using any unusual word.

3. Pupils pronounce and spell each word orally.

4. Ask what letters are found in every word. Teach the children to call
the common part the “family name” of the word and to spell it as a unit,
as, “sun—spell, s-_un_.”

5. Tell the children to look at the list of words and choose the hardest.
They may look at the word for a moment, then spell it without looking at
the book. In some such way arouse interest in the spelling of each word
in the lesson, as, “Who can find and spell the word that is the name of
something that makes a great noise?” “The one we all enjoy at recess?”
“The one that opens the flowers?” “The one we like to eat?”

6. Pronounce each word, give the family, and spell the word thus, sun,
-un, s-u-n. Have pupils emphasize the first letter—the part of each word
that is not common to the series—as, _s_un, _f_un, _b_un, _g_un, _n_un.

7. Children place their books face down on their desks, while the teacher
dictates the words. Children spell orally. If a word is missed, do not
pass it to another child. The one who missed turns over his book and
studies the correct spelling while the teacher continues to dictate words
to the other pupils. After all the children have spelled, those who
missed have a chance to spell their words correctly. From the beginning
every child must feel a responsibility for every word dictated to him. He
must spell it correctly before the lesson is ended for him.

In all oral spelling, save time by having the children respond in turn
without being called upon by name. Perhaps the best way is to go up and
down the rows.


COPYING A SPELLING LESSON

Spell the first word very softly and write it on the blackboard as you
pronounce each letter. The children look at the written form on the
board, and copy the word, saying to themselves each letter as they write.
Do the same with other words.

It is not necessary to copy each word more than once. The common part or
family name—the combination of letters that requires special drill—is
repeated in each word.

As pupils gain facility in written letter forms, they should copy their
lessons once in script from the printed lesson in the book. For the first
ten lessons, however, the teacher may well take the time to have the work
copied from the board.


DICTATING A SPELLING LESSON

The teacher who truly means to make her children realize the importance
of accurate spelling and neat writing will see that each child has a
notebook in which to keep his spelling lessons. She will show him just
how the work should be arranged in his book. (The child’s Spelling Book
shows a good arrangement.) She will insist that he follow the arrangement
and that his penmanship be neat. If the teacher cannot provide regular
blank books for spelling, the children may make their own of regular
writing paper, fastening the requisite number of sheets together with two
Magill fasteners, or sewing them with thread or raffia.

In dictating, pronounce each word clearly and distinctly. Have the
children repeat, then write the word. This habit of correct pronunciation
of the words cannot be overemphasized. It has been said, and the saying
is true, “A word correctly pronounced is half spelled.”


MARKING AND CORRECTING PAPERS

When a lesson is perfect, mark it. Mark it 100%. That is the mark
primary children like best. Mark it in colored pencil. If the child has
made a special effort in writing or in neatness, show your appreciation
and observation by affixing a star or some other symbol to his paper.
Encourage him, make him proud of his spelling, proud of his writing,
proud of his book, proud of himself.

Give no spelling mark but the mark for perfect work.

When a child makes a mistake in spelling, call his attention to it. If it
is only a careless mistake, he will spell the word orally. The _teacher_
then erases the mistake, and the child corrects it. If, however, the
child has not mastered the correct spelling, he should be referred to
his book. When he can spell the word, the teacher erases the incorrectly
spelled word, and the child writes it correctly.

The correcting of the lesson should follow as soon as possible the
writing of the lesson. In order that this may be done in the same period,
the lessons are kept very short. In order that there may be few mistakes
the lessons are very simple. If the lessons are studied as suggested,
there should be very few errors to correct. If the work is corrected
as definitely as outlined, the pupils will soon learn what is required
of them, and will take pride in having a perfect, attractive book. The
arousing of such pride, and the cultivation of habits of correctness and
neatness are of incalculable value.

1. By thoughtful, intelligent study, prevent errors.

2. When mistakes are made, have the pupils correct them immediately as an
important duty.


SIGHT WORDS

Lesson 3, Page 2

The children have had two series or families in past lessons. In the new
lesson ask them to look for words that belong to these families. They
will find _run_ in the _un_ family, and _me_, _the_, _tree_, in the _e_
(_ee_) family. These words should be distinctly pronounced and spelled
orally.

The remaining word is _to_. It belongs to no family that the children
have studied. Have the children pronounce it, use it in a number of
simple sentences, and spell it.

Give each child a small piece of paper. Tell the children to look at _to_
and spell it silently. Then without looking at the book have them write
the word on paper. Each word in the lesson may be studied and written in
the same way.


WRITING SENTENCES

Lesson 4, Page 2

No new spelling words occur in this lesson. It is a review, an
application of some of the words learned.

The first lesson, and perhaps a few others of the same kind, should be
taught from the board, although it is better that each child should have
a book before him.

A child reads the first sentence from the book. “Run to me.”

The teacher says, “I will write it on the board if you will spell the
words. The children in the first row stand.”

Without waiting to be called upon by name the children spell the words in
turn.

The teacher says, “_Run_ begins with a capital letter because it is the
first word in a sentence. Spell it, capital R-u-n.”

When all the words in the sentence have been spelled and written on the
board, the teacher places the period at the end, saying, “There is a
period at the end of this sentence.”

The second sentence is to be spelled by the children and written on the
board by the teacher in the same way.

The children may now copy the sentences from the blackboard.

The two things to be taught in this lesson are the capital to begin the
first word, and the period at the end of the sentence.


REVIEWS OF PHONETIC WORDS

Phonetic reviews are given frequently throughout the book. Each lesson
contains one word of the series taught. These words are numbered.

Have the children open their books to the review lesson, as that on page
6.

Let the children read the words and the families, as, _run-un_, _me-e_,
_play-ay_, _fly-y_. Then have each word spelled orally.

Now dictate other words from the same families, as, _sun_, _see_, _gay_,
_cry_, _sand_. If a pupil misspells a word, give him the number of the
family in which the word occurs. Let him look in his book, study his
word, and be ready to spell it when you have finished dictating other
words to the rest of the class. Thus you may dictate the word _say_. The
child hesitates or misspells the word. Give him number 3. He looks in his
book, finds 3 and the well-known word _play_ after the number. He knows
the word _say_ is in the same family, and he studies out the word while
you are hearing the rest of the class spell words in the other families.
When you return to him and ask, “What is your word?” he answers,
“Say—s-a-y.”

Never pass a word to a second child. Each child must spell, with help if
necessary, every word that is dictated to him.

For written review, dictate any words from the series represented in the
review lesson. Return again and again to these review lessons.


SEAT WORK

Have the children copy the words and under each write one or more words
in the same family. Thus:

    run   me   play   fly   and
    fun   be   hay    try   band


REVIEWS OF SIGHT WORDS

Use these reviews for oral spelling matches and for written tests. Keep
records of these written tests. There are 36 sight words assigned to the
first year.

The following chart is simple and effective in keeping a record of these
tests.


SPELLING CHART

We can spell:

    Children’s Names    12 Words    24 Words    36 Words

    John Smith            100%        100%
    Mary Brown            100%
    Tom Good              100%        100%        100%

This shows that John Smith can spell the first two columns of sight
words given on page 17, Mary Brown can spell the first column, and Tom
Good can spell all three. No mark but the 100% mark is placed on the
chart. Arouse the child’s interest and ambition to master these sight
words.

In the second year, keep a space on the chart for each review lesson as
it occurs.


ADDITIONAL SEAT WORK

1. Make the words or sentences in each lesson with “word builder”
letters. This work should be carefully examined to see that it is correct
and that it follows the arrangement given in the book.

2. Copy in script the lesson from the book.


THE QUESTION

Lesson 32, Page 8

Teach the use of the question mark as follows, “There is a question mark
after ‘Will they fall?’ because this sentence asks a question.”


QUOTATION MARKS

Lesson 23, Page 25

Have the children copy these sentences, telling them that the quotation
marks are put around, “Where are my baby stars?” because these are the
words of the moon. If omitted in dictation lessons, have the child open
his book and put them in, but do not count this omission an error.




THE ALDINE SPELLER

PART ONE

FIRST YEAR

[Illustration]




FIRST YEAR


THE ALPHABET

    +---+---+---+---+
    | a | b | c | d |
    +---+---+---+---+
    | e | f | g | h |
    +---+---+---+---+
    | i | j | k | l |
    +---+---+---+---+
    | m | n | o | p |
    +---+---+---+---+
    | q | r | s | t |
    +---+---+---+---+
    | u | v | w | x |
    +---+---+---+---+
    |   | y | z |   |
    +---+---+---+---+

1

    sun
    fun
    bun
    gun
    nun

2

    be
    he
    we
    see
    bee

3

    run
    to
    me
    tree
    the

[Illustration]

4

Run to me.

Run to the tree.

5

    day
    gay
    hay
    may
    say

6

    band
    hand
    land
    sand
    stand

7

    play
    and
    with

[Illustration]

8

Run and play.

Play with me.

9

    by
    my
    try
    cry
    dry
    buy
    why

10

    bold
    cold
    gold
    sold
    told
    hold
    fold

11

    fly
    birds
    lit tle
    old

[Illustration]

12

The little birds fly.

Fly to the old tree.

13

    best
    rest
    west
    test
    vest
    chest
    pest

14

    all
    ball
    call
    fall
    hall
    wall
    small

15

    pin
    spin
    tin
    chin
    win
    skin
    thin

16

    nest
    is
    in
    tall

17

    ear
    dear
    fear
    year
    near
    tear

18

    low
    row
    grow
    show
    slow
    snow

19

    bit
    hit
    pit
    sit
    fit
    wit

[Illustration]

20

Fly to the nest.

The nest is in the tall tree.


REVIEW

21

    (1) run
    (2) me
    (3) play
    (4) fly
    (5) and
    (6) bold

22

    (7) all
    (8) best
    (9) in
    (10) dear
    (11) blow
    (12) it

23

    hear
    wind
    blow
    it

[Illustration]

24

Hear the wind blow.

It blows the tall trees.

25

    bill
    fill
    hill
    mill
    still
    ill

26

    ring
    bring
    wing
    king
    thing
    spring

27

    bad
    had
    lad
    mad
    sad
    glad

28

    book
    hook
    took
    brook
    cook
    shook

29

    bat
    cat
    hat
    that
    sat
    fat

30

    wade
    fade
    grade
    shade
    spade
    made

31

    will
    sing
    they

[Illustration]

32

The birds sing in the tree.

Will they fall?

33

    look
    who
    at

[Illustration]

Look at the little nest.

Who made it?

34

    fan
    man
    pan
    ran

35

    song
    long
    strong
    gong

36

    up
    cup
    sup
    pup

37

    can
    you
    yes

[Illustration]

Can you sing?

Yes, I can sing a song.

REVIEW

38

    (1) will
    (2) sing
    (3) glad
    (4) look
    (5) at
    (6) made

39

    (7) can
    (8) song
    (9) blow
    (10) it
    (11) nest
    (12) the

40

    peep
    deep
    creep
    keep
    sheep
    sweep

41

    bed
    fed
    Ned
    red
    sled
    led

42

    might
    sight
    light
    right
    bright
    fight

[Illustration]

43

Sleep, little bird.

Sleep in the little nest.

Sleep and rest.

44

    night
    are
    a sleep

[Illustration]

It is night.

The birds are asleep.

45

    fast
    last
    cast
    mast
    past
    blast

46

    hop
    mop
    drop
    stop
    shop
    top

47

    bake
    cake
    lake
    make
    rake
    take

48

    wake
    up

[Illustration]

Wake up.

The night is past.

Fly to the tree-top.


REVIEW

49

    (1) sleep
    (2) bed
    (3) night
    (4) last
    (5) top

50

    (6) wake
    (7) up
    (8) look
    (9) old
    (10) all

51

    one
    two
    three
    four
    five

52

    six
    sev en
    eight
    nine
    ten

53

    fa ther
    moth er
    broth er
    sis ter
    ba by

54

    girl
    boy
    has
    dog
    doll

[Illustration]

The boy has a dog.

The girl has a doll.

55

    blew
    new
    knew
    dew
    few
    flew

56

    Jack
    back
    black
    tack
    crack
    sack

57

    in to
    into
    up on
    upon
    a way
    away

58

    come
    from

[Illustration]

The birds flew away from the nest.

Will they come back?


REVIEW OF PHONETIC WORDS

    fun
    he
    say
    stand
    buy
    told
    west
    small
    skin
    dear
    know
    sit
    still
    bring
    had
    took
    that
    made
    man
    long
    keep
    red
    right
    last
    stop
    knew
    back
    cup
    make
    ring
    deep
    hand
    thin


REVIEW OF SIGHT WORDS

    to
    with
    birds
    little
    is
    wind
    they
    who
    you
    yes
    are
    one
    two
    three
    four
    five
    six
    seven
    eight
    nine
    ten
    father
    mother
    brother
    sister
    baby
    boy
    girl
    has
    dog
    doll
    into
    on
    upon
    come
    from

[Illustration]




THE ALDINE SPELLER

PART ONE

SECOND YEAR

[Illustration]


SECOND YEAR

1

    moon
    soon
    noon
    spoon
    boon

2

    did
    hid
    bid
    lid
    kid

3

    star
    far
    bar
    car
    tar

4

    you
    were
    was
    too

[Illustration]

Did you see the sky last night?

The moon was bright.

The stars were shining too.

5

    find
    kind
    bind
    be hind
    mind

6

    fine
    dine
    line
    mine
    shine

7

    cross
    toss
    boss
    loss
    moss

8

    her
    chil dren

[Illustration]

The moon is the mother.

The stars are her children.

9


REVIEW OF SIGHT WORDS

    children
    you
    were
    was
    too
    her


REVIEW OF PHONETIC WORDS

10

    (1) moon
    (2) find
    (3) hid
    (4) cross
    (5) dine
    (6) noon
    (7) far

11

    (1) did
    (2) loss
    (3) shine
    (4) kind
    (5) bar
    (6) pine
    (7) lid

12

    (1) star
    (2) fine
    (3) soon
    (4) boss
    (5) bid
    (6) bind
    (7) nine

13

    tell
    well
    bell
    fell
    spell

14

    loud
    cloud
    proud

15

    must
    just
    dust
    rust
    crust

16

    would
    not

[Illustration]


STARS AND DAISIES

One night the little stars were cross.

They would not shine.

They hid behind a cloud.

17

    born
    corn
    horn
    morn

18

    grass
    pass
    class
    glass

19

    how
    cow
    now
    bow

20

    down
    town
    gown
    clown
    brown
    crown
    drown

21

    get
    let
    yet
    met
    net
    pet
    wet

22

    saw
    paw
    jaw
    law
    raw
    straw
    draw

23

    Where
    said
    shin ing
    do

“Where are my baby stars?” said the moon.

“Why are they not shining?”

“Tell me why they do not shine,” she said.

24

    want
    large
    go ing

[Illustration]

We do not want to shine.

Let the large stars shine.

We are going to sleep.

25

    no
    go
    earth
    la zy
    here

You were born to shine.

I will have no lazy stars here.

You must go to the earth.


REVIEW OF SIGHT WORDS

26

    do
    going
    earth
    too
    said

27

    want
    here
    would
    why
    children

28

    large
    not
    lazy
    where
    were


REVIEW OF PHONETIC WORDS

29

    (1) down
    (2) loud
    (3) drown
    (4) corn
    (5) how
    (6) loss

30

    (1) get
    (2) soon
    (3) just
    (4) shine
    (5) born
    (6) now

31

    (1) crust
    (2) behind
    (3) spell
    (4) car
    (5) did
    (6) draw

32

    their
    lost
    most
    them

The lazy stars shook with fear.

Most of them lost their hold.

Down they fell to the earth.

[Illustration]

33

    shone
    stone
    bone
    tone

34

    good
    stood
    wood
    hood

35

    love
    above
    dove
    shove

36

[Illustration]

    on
    been
    wish
    lie
    there

The little stars had to lie on the cold grass.

All night they had to lie there.

They wished they had been good.

37

    done
    an y
    for

Did any one see the stars?

Father Sun saw them.

“What can be done for them?” he said.

[Illustration]

38

    cov er
    die
    if

“How cold the stars look.

They will die,” said the sun.

“Not if we cover them with snow,” said the clouds.

39

    rose
    those
    nose
    hose
    pose

40

    sent
    went
    bent
    tent
    dent

41

    came
    name
    game
    same
    lame

42

    win ter

All winter the stars were covered with snow.

The stars above shone down on them.

But they did not wake.

43

    rain
    gain
    pain
    grain
    chain
    train
    plain

44

    rock
    cock
    block
    lock
    knock
    clock
    sock

45

    eat
    heat
    beat
    meat
    neat
    seat
    cheat

46

    his
    dai sy
    time
    dai sies

At last the spring came.

The sun sent his rays down to the earth.

It is time for the stars to wake.

47

    o pen
    eyes
    smile

The stars opened their sleepy eyes.

They looked up at the sun.

He smiled at them.

They were not cross now.

48

    these
    live
    now

These stars now live on the earth.

They shine all day long.

Children call them daisies.

[Illustration]


REVIEW OF SIGHT WORDS

49

    cover
    their
    die
    lost
    wish
    been
    done
    for
    his

50

    March winds rock the trees.    March
    April brings the rain.         April
    May brings the birds back.     May
    June brings roses.             June
    July brings heat.              July


REVIEW OF PHONETIC WORDS

51

    (1) soon
    (2) hid
    (3) far
    (4) sell
    (5) kind
    (6) shine
    (7) loss

52

    (1) brown
    (2) get
    (3) horn
    (4) just
    (5) class
    (6) stone
    (7) straw

53

    deer
    peer
    cheer
    queer
    steer

54

    hark
    dark
    bark
    mark
    park

55

    gift
    swift
    lift
    drift
    sift

56

    San ta Claus
    as
    rein deer
    com ing

[Illustration]

Hark! I hear bells.

Santa Claus is coming.

His reindeer are as swift as light.

57

    ought
    bought
    brought
    thought
    sought

58

    big
    dig
    fig
    pig
    twig

59

    bag
    flag
    drag
    rag
    tag

60

    us
    man y

Santa Claus came last night.

We were all asleep.

He brought us many gifts.

[Illustration]

61

    does
    what
    car ry
    him
    our
    ver y

We did not see him.

How does Santa carry our gifts?

He has a big bag.

What a very big bag it is!

62

    As bright as day.
    As swift as a deer.
    As old as the hills.
    As good as gold.
    As red as a rose.
    As dark as night.

63

    cra dle
    cook y
    box
    can dy
    of

Santa brought Nell a doll cradle.

He brought Ned a box of candy.

He brought baby sister a cooky.

[Illustration]

64

    kit ten
    milk
    some
    don’t

He brought the kitten some milk.

He brought the dog a bone.

Don’t you love Santa?


REVIEW OF SIGHT WORDS

65

    done
    time
    smile
    now
    Santa Claus
    many
    carry
    candy
    said
    do

66

    his
    open
    these
    March
    June
    of
    does
    our
    cooky
    milk

67

    eyes
    if
    live
    April
    July
    reindeer
    us
    cradle
    box
    some

68

    don’t
    were
    children
    you
    too
    would
    was
    her
    where

69

    head
    spread
    dead
    lead
    read
    bread
    thread

70

    ice
    nice
    slice
    mice
    rice
    price
    spice

71

    air
    hair
    fair
    pair
    chair
    lair
    stair

72

    to day
    today
    do not
    don’t

[Illustration]

    Cloud, cloud, don’t stay today,
    But spread your wings and fly away.

73

    A glass of milk and a slice of bread,
    And then good-night, we must so to bed.

[Illustration]

74

    barn
    popped
    kit ty

    Some mice sat in the barn to spin,
    Kitty came by and popped her head in.

75

    feed
    deed
    need
    seed
    weed
    reed
    speed

76

    gave
    shave
    save
    brave
    cave
    wave
    pave

77

    pick
    quick
    Dick
    kick
    lick
    sick
    tick

78

    bar ber

    Barber, barber, shave a pig.
    How many hairs will make a wig?

[Illustration]

79

    words
    like
    gar den
    full

    A man of words and not of deeds
    Is like a garden full of weeds.


REVIEW OF SIGHT WORDS

80

    been
    two
    father
    five
    baby
    nine
    any
    many

81

    their
    ten
    three
    brother
    six
    mother
    cover
    little

82

    one
    eight
    dog
    four
    sister
    seven
    large
    done

83

    you will
    you’ll
    luck

    See a pin and pick it up,
    All the day you’ll have good luck.

84

    out
    about
    pout
    stout
    spout
    shout
    scout
    trout

85

    broke
    smoke
    spoke
    joke
    poke
    yoke
    choke
    woke

86

    pail
    sail
    wail
    tail
    bail
    fail
    nail
    mail

87

    wa ter
    tum bling
    aft er

    Jack and Jill went up the hill
    To get a pail of water.
    Jack fell down and broke his crown,
    And Jill came tumbling after.

88

    luck
    duck
    cluck
    tuck
    stuck
    suck

89

    owl
    fowl
    growl
    howl
    prowl

90

    cried
    dried
    fried
    died
    lied
    tied

91

[Illustration]

    A little boy went into a barn
    And lay down on some hay.
    An owl came out and flew about,
    And the little boy ran away.


REVIEW OF PHONETIC WORDS

92

    (1) nice
    (2) gave
    (3) chair
    (4) feed
    (5) quick
    (6) cried

93

    (1) bread
    (2) duck
    (3) broke
    (4) pail
    (5) brave
    (6) owl

94

    (1) howl
    (2) about
    (3) sail
    (4) spoke
    (5) stick
    (6) tied

95

    once
    so

[Illustration]

    Once I saw a little bird
    Come, hop, hop, hop;
    So I cried, “Little bird,
    Will you stop, stop, stop?”

96

    lies
    flies
    cries
    skies
    dries
    tries
    ties

97

    cool
    school
    fool
    pool
    spool
    tool
    stool

98

    ate
    late
    gate
    mate
    hate
    plate
    Kate

99

    there is
    there’s
    points
    room

    There’s a neat little clock,
      In the schoolroom it stands,
    And it points to the time
      With its two little hands.


REVIEW OF SIGHT WORDS

100

    where
    kitty
    words
    like
    garden
    once

101

    after
    full
    water
    barn
    done
    now

102

    candy
    don’t
    was
    were
    us
    you

103

    rise
    nev er
    wise

    Cocks crow in the morn
      To tell us to rise,
    And he who lies late
      Will never be wise.

104

    ant
    can’t
    pant
    lost
    cost
    frost
    cap
    lap
    map

105

    rap
    nap
    trap
    rap ping
    nap ping
    trap ping
    rapped
    napped
    trapped

106

    Bo-peep
    they will
    they’ll
    leave
    home
    can not
    can’t

[Illustration]

107

    Little Bo-peep has lost her sheep,
      And can’t tell where to find them;
    Leave them alone and they’ll come home,
      And bring their tails behind them.

108

    hive
    live
    drive
    five
    alive
    dive

109

    ten
    then
    hen
    den
    pen
    men

110

    kite
    bite
    site
    white
    write
    quite

111

    fish
    caught
    a gain

    One, two, three, four, five,
    I caught a fish alive.

    Six, seven, eight, nine, ten,
    I let it go again.

112

    feet
    meet
    beet
    sweet
    sheet
    fleet

113

    found
    round
    a round
    bound
    ground
    sound

114

    hide
    ride
    side
    wide
    tide
    glide

115

    sup per
    time
    egg


SUPPER TIME

    A cup of milk,
    White bread,
      An egg,
      A cooky,
    All for good girls and boys.

[Illustration]

116

    on ly
    shop ping
    dime


SHOPPING

I went shopping today.

Mother took me.

We had a ride in the cars.

Then we came to the shops.

117

I looked along the street.

I saw a candy shop.

We went in.

I had only a dime.

I bought a box of candy.

I told the man not to wrap it.

118

    pen cil
    teach er
    desk
    les son

119

AT SCHOOL

Be on time.

Have a pencil.

Keep your desk neat.

Know your lesson.

Mind your teacher.

Never pout.

Smile and smile.

[Illustration]

120

    not
    lot
    blot
    cot
    dot
    got
    hot

121

    am
    swam
    dam
    ham
    jam
    clam
    slam

122

    seen
    green
    queen
    hang
    sang
    rang


SOME SIGHT WORDS

123

    a go
    door
    goes
    put
    son

124

    aim
    do ing
    leg
    rob in
    use

125

    both
    foot
    on
    rub
    once


REVIEW OF SIGHT WORDS

126

    rise
    never
    wise
    Bo-peep
    leave
    home

127

    cannot
    fish
    caught
    again
    supper
    egg

128

    only
    dime
    shopping
    pencil
    desk
    teacher

129

    lesson
    ago
    door
    goes
    put
    son
    any

130

    aim
    doing
    their
    leg
    robin
    use
    does

131

    both
    foot
    once
    would
    there
    rub
    very


INITIAL WORDS OF PHONETIC SERIES

132

    sun
    be
    day
    band
    by
    bold
    best
    all
    pin
    ear
    low
    bit
    bill
    ring

133

    bad
    book
    bat
    wade
    fan
    song
    up
    peep
    bed
    might
    fast
    hop
    bake
    blew

134

    Jack
    moon
    did
    star
    find
    fine
    cross
    tell
    loud
    must
    born
    grass
    how
    down

135

    get
    saw
    shone
    good
    love
    rose
    sent
    came
    rain
    rock
    eat
    deer
    hark
    gift
    ought

136

    big
    bag
    head
    ice
    air
    feed
    gave
    pick
    out
    broke
    pail
    luck
    owl
    cried
    lies

137

    cool
    ate
    ant
    lost
    cap
    hive
    ten
    kite
    feet
    found
    hide
    not
    am
    seen
    hang


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF SIGHT WORDS

    after
    again
    ago
    aim
    any
    April
    are
    as
    baby
    barber
    barn
    been
    birds
    Bo-peep
    both
    box
    boy
    brother
    candy
    cannot
    can’t
    carry
    caught
    children
    come
    coming
    cooky
    cover
    cradle
    daisies
    daisy
    desk
    die
    dime
    do
    does
    dog
    doing
    doll
    done
    don’t
    door
    earth
    egg
    eight
    eyes
    father
    fish
    five
    foot
    for
    four
    from
    full
    garden
    girl
    go
    goes
    going
    has
    her
    here
    him
    his
    home
    if
    into
    is
    July
    June
    Kitten
    kitty
    large
    lazy
    leave
    leg
    lesson
    lie
    like
    little
    live
    lost
    many
    March
    May
    milk
    most
    mother
    never
    nine
    no
    not
    of
    on
    once
    one
    only
    open
    our
    pencil
    point
    popped
    put
    reindeer
    rise
    robin
    room
    rub
    said
    Santa Claus
    seven
    shining
    sister
    six
    smile
    so
    some
    son
    supper
    teacher
    ten
    their
    them
    there
    these
    they
    three
    time
    to
    too
    tumbling
    two
    upon
    us
    use
    very
    want
    was
    water
    were
    what
    where
    who
    wind
    winter
    wise
    wish
    with
    words
    would
    yes
    you


PHONIC SERIES

1

    see
    be
    bee
    me
    he
    she
    the
    we
    tree
    three
    flee
    knee
    free
    glee

2

    fly
    sky
    by
    my
    try
    why
    cry
    dry
    buy
    spry
    fry
    shy
    spy

3

    old
    hold
    cold
    bold
    fold
    gold
    mold
    sold
    told

4

    nest
    best
    west
    rest
    chest
    pest
    test
    vest

5

    say
    day
    may
    gay
    hay
    lay
    play
    clay
    pay
    ray
    pray
    gray
    tray
    way
    sway
    stay

6

    all
    fall
    hall
    call
    tall
    stall
    ball
    wall
    small

7

    flew
    blew
    few
    hew
    dew
    new
    knew
    pew

9

    grow
    blow
    snow
    low
    flow
    slow
    bow
    tow
    mow
    sow
    show
    know
    row
    crow
    throw
    glow

10

    get
    let
    yet
    met
    net
    bet
    pet
    set
    wet
    fret

11

    ill
    will
    till
    fill
    bill
    hill
    mill
    kill
    pill
    spill
    sill
    still
    drill
    skill
    gill
    chill

12

    sing
    wing
    ring
    cling
    fling
    sling
    bring
    spring
    string
    king
    thing
    sting
    swing

13

    made
    shade
    spade
    fade
    wade
    trade
    grade
    blade

14

    glad
    had
    bad
    lad
    mad
    sad

15

    an
    can
    ran
    man
    fan
    pan
    span
    tan
    than
    plan

16

    look
    took
    cook
    book
    hook
    nook
    brook
    shook

17

    back
    crack
    Jack
    pack
    lack
    black
    rack
    track
    sack
    tack

18

    found
    bound
    round
    ground
    mound
    pound
    sound

19

    tell
    well
    fell
    bell
    swell
    cell
    sell
    spell
    shell
    smell
    dwell

20

    night
    might
    right
    bright
    fight
    slight
    flight
    sight
    tight
    light

21

    last
    fast
    past
    blast
    cast
    mast

22

    hide
    side
    ride
    bride
    pride
    wide
    tide
    glide
    slide

23

    at
    hat
    cat
    bat
    fat
    that
    mat
    pat
    rat
    sat
    flat

24

    long
    song
    gong
    wrong
    strong

25

    feet
    meet
    beet
    sweet
    greet
    fleet
    sheet
    street
    sleet

26

    kite
    white
    write
    bite
    quite

27

    wake
    make
    bake
    cake
    lake
    rake
    sake
    take
    stake
    shake
    flake

28

    ear
    near
    hear
    dear
    fear
    rear
    tear
    year
    clear

29

    feed
    need
    deed
    heed
    seed
    weed
    reed
    bleed
    speed

30

    rain
    plain
    grain
    brain
    gain
    lain
    slain
    pain
    main
    vain
    chain
    train
    strain
    drain
    stain
    Spain
    sprain

31

    soon
    moon
    noon
    spoon

32

    and
    land
    sand
    band
    stand
    grand
    brand
    hand

33

    must
    just
    crust
    dust
    rust
    trust

34

    saw
    paw
    caw
    jaw
    law
    raw
    straw
    claw
    draw
    gnaw
    thaw

35

    star
    far
    bar
    car
    mar
    tar
    jar
    scar

36

    bed
    red
    Fred
    led
    fled
    sled
    Ned
    fed
    wed
    shed

37

    did
    hid
    bid
    kid
    lid
    rid

38

    top
    stop
    drop
    hop
    mop
    pop
    crop
    prop
    shop
    chop

39

    morn
    horn
    corn
    born
    thorn

40

    up
    cup

41

    sun
    fun
    run
    bun
    gun
    nun

42

    blue
    due
    glue
    cue

43

    peep
    deep
    keep
    weep
    sweep
    steep
    creep
    sheep
    sleep

44

    it
    sit
    bit
    fit
    hit
    wit
    pit
    quit

45

    head
    dead
    lead
    read
    bread
    tread
    spread
    thread

46

    air
    fair
    hair
    pair
    chair
    stair

47

    went
    sent
    bent
    dent
    cent
    rent
    tent
    spent

48

    came
    name
    game
    dame
    fame
    flame
    same
    tame
    lame
    blame
    frame
    shame

49

    in
    din
    fin
    sin
    tin
    win
    pin
    chin
    spin
    skin
    grin
    thin

50

    down
    town
    gown
    brown
    crown
    drown
    frown

51

    shone
    stone
    bone
    cone
    drone
    tone

52

    big
    dig
    fig
    pig
    rig
    twig

53

    seen
    green
    queen
    screen
    keen

54

    him
    dim
    brim
    trim
    swim
    skim
    slim

55

    over
    clover
    Rover

56

    eat
    beat
    heat
    meat
    neat
    seat
    cheat
    treat
    wheat

57

    hang
    sang
    gang
    rang

58

    rap
    clap
    gap
    cap
    lap
    map
    nap
    sap
    strap
    slap
    snap
    trap
    wrap

59

    am
    swam
    dam
    ham
    jam
    clam
    slam

60

    ought
    thought
    brought
    bought
    fought
    sought

63

    cool
    fool
    spool
    pool
    tool
    stool
    school

64

    rock
    cock
    block
    frock
    flock
    lock
    mock
    knock
    stock
    shock
    clock
    sock

66

    not
    lot
    blot
    cot
    dot
    got
    hot
    knot
    pot
    plot
    shot
    spot
    tot
    trot

67

    hark
    dark
    spark
    bark
    mark
    park
    lark

68

    hive
    live
    dive
    five
    alive
    drive

70

    find
    kind
    bind
    hind
    mind
    wind
    grind
    blind

71

    rose
    those
    nose
    hose
    pose
    close

72

    quick
    tick
    Dick
    kick
    lick
    pick
    sick
    stick
    brick
    trick
    thick
    slick

73

    then
    hen
    den
    men
    pen
    ten
    when

74

    deer
    peer
    cheer
    queer
    steer

78

    ice
    mice
    nice
    price
    rice
    slice
    spice
    twice
    vice

83

    ail
    sail
    snail
    nail
    bail
    fail
    hail
    jail
    mail
    pail
    rail
    trail
    tail

84

    ate
    gate
    Kate
    late
    date
    grate
    hate
    mate
    plate
    rate
    state
    skate
    slate

85

    ant
    can’t
    grant
    pant
    slant

86

    cried
    died
    dried
    fried
    lied
    tried
    tied

87

    out
    about
    pout
    stout
    spout
    shout
    scout
    trout

88

    flies
    skies
    dries
    lies
    tries
    cries

91

    cash
    dash
    flash
    clash
    hash
    lash
    mash
    sash
    rash
    trash

92

    love
    dove
    glove
    shove

94

    fine
    pine
    dine
    line
    mine
    nine
    wine
    vine
    shine
    whine
    twine

95

    grass
    pass
    mass
    glass
    lass
    class
    brass

98

    moss
    toss
    boss
    cross
    loss

100

    how
    bow
    cow
    now
    brow
    plow
    mow

113

    gave
    save
    brave
    cave
    pave
    shave
    slave
    wave
    grave
    knave

123

    good
    stood
    hood
    wood

124

    spoke
    broke
    joke
    poke
    smoke
    choke
    yoke
    woke

128

    owl
    growl
    fowl
    howl
    prowl

145

    aid
    maid
    paid
    laid
    braid

167

    brag
    flag
    drag
    stag
    bag
    rag
    tag

[Illustration]



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ALDINE SPELLER, PART ONE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.