[Cover Illustration]




                           All That Happened
                               In A Week



                             [Illustration]



                         _A Story for Children_



                           T. Nelson and Sons




[Illustration: “Do you live in that nice place among the baskets?”
 _Page 51._]




                           ALL THAT HAPPENED
                          IN A WEEK _A STORY_
                         _FOR LITTLE CHILDREN_

                                   By

                           Jane H. Findlater

                                   ❦

                           LONDON, EDINBURGH,
                           DUBLIN, & NEW YORK
                             THOMAS NELSON
                                AND SONS




                              _CONTENTS._

           _I._ _The Arrival_,                                   9
          _II._ _The Wasps_,                                    15
         _III._ _The Doctor_,                                   20
          _IV._ _The White Stones_,                             27
           _V._ _A Very Bad Child_,                             32
          _VI._ _A Day in Bed_,                                 41
         _VII._ _The Adventure in the Lane_,                    49
        _VIII._ _The Ship_,                                     60
          _IX._ _The Washing Day_,                              69
           _X._ _The Sea Beasts_,                               79
          _XI._ _The Last Day at Seafield_,                     86




_All that happened in a week!_




                               CHAPTER I.
                              THE ARRIVAL.


One summer afternoon many years ago a child, called Peggy Roberts,
arrived at the door of her aunt’s house in an open carriage. Peggy was
just eight years old. She had been in the train since early in the
morning, and was very tired when the carriage stopped at the door of
Seafield. Then she noticed that everything round her was new and
different from things at home, and she forgot about feeling tired. The
house was exactly like the tea-caddy that stood on the dining-room
side-board at home, and had been brought from China by her uncle—that
is to say, it was quite square, and you felt as if you could lift off
the top like the lid of the tea-caddy.

[Illustration]

Right up to the windows there grew such a lovely rose-tree, covered all
over with branches of bright red roses.

“O Martin, let me get some of the roses!” Peggy cried, standing still on
the steps of the house.

Martin was her aunt’s maid, a stout, cross-looking woman, who always
refused to allow Peggy to do anything she wanted.

“No, no, Miss Peggy, come in for your tea; the roses are far too high
up,” she said. Peggy looked up at the beautiful dangling branches, and
her mouth went down at the corners; she thought nothing would make her
happy unless she got one of them.

It must have been because she was so tired that she began to cry about
nothing in this way. The coachman was more good-natured than Martin,
however, for he stood up on the box of the carriage and gathered a bunch
of the roses. “Here, missie,” he said, leaning down from his high seat,
and handing them to Peggy.

“Oh! oh! oh!” Peggy cried, burying her nose in the lovely red bunch.

But then something horrid happened: a whole family of great, fat, brown
earwigs came hurrying and dropping out of the roses, in the greatest
speed to get away. Down went the roses on to the steps, and Peggy cried
in earnest now.

There was nothing she hated like earwigs, and to have a whole nest of
them fall out on her frock was too much for her altogether. And then
Martin was so pleased.

“See there, Miss Peggy; that’s what you get for wanting to pick
flowers!” she said. But she did brush away the earwigs, and stamped upon
the biggest of them to Peggy’s great disgust. Then they went into the
house, and she had to speak to her aunt; and, of course, she had nothing
to say to her.

Tea was on the table. A different kind of bread was there from the
home-bread Peggy knew. She went and stood beside the table and looked at
it, then put out her finger and touched it.

“Don’t touch things on the table!” said Aunt Euphemia.

“I’m sorry!” said Peggy, and wanted to cry again. But the door opened,
and such an exceedingly nice cat came walking in, just as if the house
belonged to it, that she forgot all about crying.

She ran to the cat, and went down on her knees on the carpet to stroke
him.

“He is called Patrick,” said Aunt Euphemia; “take care that he does not
scratch you.”

But Patrick did not mean to scratch. He rubbed his big yellow face
against Peggy in the most friendly way, and then walked to the tea-table
and jumped up on a chair and mewed twice, very loudly, exactly as if he
were asking for his tea.

“Patrick is very punctual,” said Aunt Euphemia.

She poured out a saucer of milk for him, and put it on the floor. Peggy
sat down on the carpet to watch him take it. His little red tongue was
so rough and funny, she laughed out aloud at seeing it dart in and out
of the milk. Patrick never paused for a minute till he had licked the
saucer so dry that you would have thought it had been washed. Then he
licked his long, yellow whiskers, and walked away to the other end of
the room, jumped on to the sofa, and was fast asleep in a minute. Peggy
wanted to waken him, and make him play with her; but Aunt Euphemia
wouldn’t allow her. As her own tea was brought in at that moment,
however, she became interested in it.

Martin came in with Peggy’s pinafore, and glanced at the tea-tray while
she put it on. “I’ll just bring a kitchen cup for Miss Peggy,” she said,
adding aside to Aunt Euphemia, “_She’s an awfu’ breaker!_”

Peggy blushed hotly. She knew that she often broke things, but it was
horrid of Martin to remind Aunt Euphemia of it just then. She had wanted
to take tea out of one of those nice cups with the roses on them; it
wouldn’t taste a bit nice out of a kitchen cup. But it was of no use to
object. Martin always had her way, so the kitchen cup was brought, and
an ugly kitchen plate also. It was wonderful how good tea tasted after
all, and the strange bread had a nice salt taste, and the strawberry jam
was different too. Altogether, Peggy enjoyed tea very much.

When it was done, she went across to the sofa to see what Patrick was
doing. He opened his green eyes, and looked at her sleepily. One of his
paws was lying out on the cushion. Peggy took it up in her hand and felt
the funny little pads of black skin on his feet. She knew, because she
had a cat at home, that if you give a cat’s paw ever such a tiny squeeze
with your hand, its claws pop out from between the little pads of black
skin. She had sometimes done it to old Tuffy at home; so she gave
Patrick’s paw the tiniest squeeze possible, just to see the claws slide
out from their sheaths. But instead of receiving this in Tuffy’s kind
way, Patrick put out his paw in a furious rage at her, and buried all
his claws in her arm. Oh, what a howl Peggy gave, and what long, red
scratches appeared down her arm! Then Patrick jumped down from his
pillow with an angry fizz, and walked out of the room.

Aunt Euphemia rang the bell without a word.

“Martin,” she said, “put Miss Peggy to bed; she has been teasing
Patrick!”

And Peggy, sobbing with pain, went off to bed.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER II.
                               THE WASPS.


You will not have read even as much as this without finding out that
Peggy was always getting into trouble. And indeed it was her nature to
do so, poor dear, though it seldom was through any serious fault on her
part. The first evening of her visit to Seafield had ended in this fight
with Patrick, and the next morning something much worse happened. I must
tell you all about it.

The sun was shining very brightly next morning, and Peggy felt as happy
as possible. On the way downstairs she met Patrick; and because she was
very sweet-tempered and forgiving, she sat down on the top step at once,
and held out her hand to him—a little warily, of course.

She was delighted to see that Patrick, too, wanted to be on friendly
terms. He came and rubbed his head against her and purred. So they made
it up, and Peggy ran downstairs.

“May I play in the garden, auntie?” she asked at breakfast.

Aunt Euphemia considered for a moment. “Yes, if you do not leave the
garden, and do not tread upon the flower-beds, or gather the flowers,”
she answered at last.

Peggy did not much mind these regulations. It looked so delightful out
there in the sunshine that she wanted nothing else. So when breakfast
was over, she ran out and began to wander about, looking at all the new
things—quite new most of them were to her. Different flowers grew here
from those that filled the garden at home, and they were so nice to
smell, even if she might not pick them. In one corner grew a bush of a
great feathery shrub that she had never seen before. She walked round
and round it, and longed to have one of the long feathery switches for a
wand, such as fairies use.

Just as she was thinking how much she would like this, a young man came
across the lawn with the mowing-machine. He looked good-natured, Peggy
thought, and she wondered if she might ask him about the wand. She did
not know his name, however, and felt a little shy. She stood still, with
her finger in her mouth (a bad habit she had), and watched him while he
poured oil into the little holes of the mowing-machine. Then she
summoned up courage to speak to him.

“Man,” she said, in a very shy voice—“man, I would like one of these
branches for a fairy-wand; do you think I might have one?” She pointed
to the bush.

He looked up with a grunt and a laugh, flung down the oil-can, and drew
a big clasp-knife out of his pocket. “One o’ thae yins?” he asked in a
kind voice.

She nodded, and pointed to the branch she specially desired.

“What’s your name, please?” she asked.

“James, missie,” he said, hacking away at the branch while he spoke, and
in a minute he handed her the lovely long spray she had wanted.

Oh, what a wand it was!—longer a great deal than herself, and so supple
that it bent just like a whip.

“See here, missie,” said James; “ye’ll no can manage it that way; I’ll
peel it to ye.” He took the branch and began peeling off the outer skin
till it showed a satin-like white wood.

“Oh, let me peel!” cried Peggy; and together they peeled away till the
branch was bare—all except a beautiful bunch like a green tassel at the
tip.

[Illustration]

With this in her hand, Peggy walked away across the lawn, and you may
fancy how delightful it was. She pretended she was a fairy queen, and a
touch of her wand would do whatever she chose. She walked about
muttering charms to the flowers, and then saw her friend Patrick lying
on a bank. She graciously extended the tip of her wand to him, and he
played with it for a minute quite like a kitten.

But then it struck her that she would walk round the house. And outside
one of the windows she saw the funniest thing hanging. It looked like a
little bottle made of flimsy gray paper. She wondered what it could
possibly be; and standing right under it, she poked up her hand and
tickled the mouth of the gray-paper bottle. The next moment, she heard a
terrible buzzing noise, and a cloud of wasps came flying down upon her.
Peggy never knew what she did. Down went the wand, and she screamed
aloud, for the wasps were stinging her all over her hands and face. The
next moment James came running up the bank to her. He caught her up in
his arms and ran across the lawn. They both seemed surrounded and
followed by the wasps, and a new sting came on poor Peggy’s face or neck
every moment. There was a gate in the garden wall, and James ran to the
gate, opened it, and crossed the road. The next minute Peggy saw that he
was wading into the sea with her and dipping her under the water.

The wasps fell away in the distance, an angry, buzzing, black cloud; and
poor Peggy, more dead than alive, found herself being carried back to
the house, all her clothes dripping with the salt water. James was
dripping too, and moving his head in a queer way as if his neck hurt
him.




                              CHAPTER III.
                              THE DOCTOR.


Though it was only ten o’clock in the morning, Peggy was glad enough to
be put to bed at once when she got back to the house. Martin and Aunt
Euphemia rubbed all her stings with washing-blue and earth, and after
that the worst of the pain went out of them. But how Peggy’s head did
begin to ache! Then she got sleepy, and had funny dreams, and woke up
crying, and couldn’t eat the nice dinner Martin brought up to her.
Martin was quite kind too, and tried to get her to eat; but it was no
use—she did not want anything. It was very hot too—oh, so hot, Peggy
couldn’t lie still, and tumbled about in bed. At last, just when she was
so hot that she sat up to see if that would make her cooler, Aunt
Euphemia came in, bringing with her a strange man, who laid Peggy down
on the pillows again, and took hold of her wrist with one hand, while he
held his watch in the other.

“This is the doctor, Peggy,” said Aunt Euphemia in explanation.

“Do the stings hurt you still, Peggy?” he asked, pulling up her sleeves
to look at the marks on her arm. But Peggy scarcely knew what hurt her
most, her head was so sore, and she felt so sick.

“I am going to make you quite well,” the doctor said; “but you must take
something nasty first.”

He looked at Peggy and laughed.

Aunt Euphemia looked very stern. “I will make her take it!” she said.

“Oh, Peggy is too good to need to be made to take things, I’m sure,”
said the doctor.

Peggy sat up suddenly in bed.

“If _you_ give it to me _quick_,” she said to the doctor, “I’ll take
it!”

“Very well; here it is,” he said, shaking a powder into a glass, and
holding it out to Peggy.

Aunt Euphemia expected her to taste it and declare she couldn’t take it;
but Peggy drank the medicine right off without a word, and lay down
again.

“Poor little soul! Keep her in bed to-morrow, and I fancy she will be
all right next day,” said the doctor.—“Good-night, Peggy; go to sleep,
and if you are quite well on Thursday when I come you shall have a ride
on my horse.”

These were the last words Peggy heard, and she fell asleep very soon,
and slept all night long.

It is horrid to be kept in bed when one feels quite well. Peggy wanted
to get up and go out next day, and instead, had to lie still with
nothing to amuse her. The bed she was in was of a kind you never see
nowadays, with four huge mahogany pillars supporting red damask
curtains. It was just like sleeping in a tent.

Peggy found that by sitting high up on the pillows she could see out of
the window. The sea was right in front of the house, and a little
harbour filled with ships. There was a funny noise always going on at
the harbour, and Martin told her it was the ships being loaded with
coal. In the evening, just when Peggy was very dull, she saw a ship with
great white sails come floating along. There was scarcely any wind, so
every one of the sails was up, and it looked like a big white bird.
Then, as it came near the mouth of the harbour, it stood quite still in
the water, and a little steamer went puffing out to it. A rope was
thrown to the ship, and by this rope it was towed into the harbour.
Peggy could hear the men calling out to one another and laughing.

“Maybe, if you are good, Miss Peggy, I’ll take ye down to the harbour
one day,” said Martin.

“Might I get on to one of the ships?” Peggy asked.

“No, no—dirty places—all coal-dust; whatever would Miss Roberts say to
that?”

“Oh, but I would like to be on a ship, and the coal-dust would do me no
harm,” pleaded Peggy.

“There’s nothing but dirty Germans on the ships, Miss Peggy—speaking
like monkeys, and rings in their ears—Spanish, and Dutch, and Italian,
some of them. No, no; it’s no place for you!”

Peggy said no more. But, would you believe it, she decided that she
_must_ see these men with rings in their ears, who spoke like monkeys,
however she managed it. And with this thought she fell asleep.

Dr. Seaton came on Thursday, and by that time Peggy was quite well, and
out of bed again.

“May I take her down the avenue on my horse, Miss Roberts?” he asked of
Aunt Euphemia. “I promised her that I would.”

“Oh, don’t trouble with the child,” said Aunt Euphemia. “I mean to take
her for a drive with me this afternoon.”

[Illustration]

There was a moment’s pause, and Peggy looked very hard at Dr.
Seaton—very hard indeed. A drive with Aunt Euphemia would be quite
different from a ride with him, she thought.

“Mayn’t I take her? She shall not get into any mischief,” he said.

Peggy gave his hand a little squeeze to show what _she_ felt about it,
and Aunt Euphemia consented.

Dr. Seaton’s horse was tied to a ring at the door—a high, gray beast.
It had taken a mouthful of the earwig roses, and was munching away at
them when Peggy came down the steps.

“O horse, there are such lots of earwigs in these roses,” she said in
disgust, “I am sure they can’t be nice to eat!”

Dr. Seaton laughed, and told Peggy the horse didn’t mind the taste of
earwigs a bit. Then he lifted her up on to the shiny saddle that made a
nice creaking noise, and gave her the reins into her own hands, while he
held her on. The horse stepped away down the avenue so obediently, just
as if he were quite accustomed to having Peggy on his back. It was
delightful, being so high up, and feeling the horse move. Peggy thought
it made up for the wasps.

“I’m glad the wasps made me ill,” she said, “or I wouldn’t have had this
ride.”

At the gate they came in sight of the sea, and Peggy remembered what
Martin had told her.

“Oh, Martin told me the men on the ships talked like monkeys and had
rings in their ears,” she said, “and I want to see them.”

“Have you never been on a ship?” Dr. Seaton asked.

“No, never. The sea doesn’t come near home, you know,” Peggy explained.

“Well, would you like to come with me some day on to one? Would Aunt
Euphemia let you? I go to see a boy with a broken arm on one of the
ships. I’ll take you, if your aunt lets you come.”

Peggy was quite sure now that it was worth while being ill. Dr. Seaton
lifted her down off the horse, and told her to run back up the avenue.

“I’d like just to kiss the horse’s nose first,” she said. “He has been
so nice.”

But Dr. Seaton suggested it would be wiser to pat him—just in case he
were to bite; so Peggy contented herself with this, and then ran away up
the avenue as pleased as possible.




                              CHAPTER IV.
                           THE WHITE STONES.


“Martin will put on your hat and jacket, Peggy, and you will come out for
a nice drive with me at three o’clock,” said Aunt Euphemia at lunch.
This seemed a pleasant thing to do, but Peggy did not look pleased. She
sat quite still and made no answer.

“Don’t you wish to come?” asked Aunt Euphemia at last.

“No,” said truthful Peggy. The fact was, she had found such a delightful
new game that she wanted to go on playing it all the rest of her life.

“What would you do if you stayed at home?” asked Aunt Euphemia.

Peggy would not say. It spoils a game so much to explain it to other
people.

“I’d just like to stay and play in the garden,” she said.

Aunt Euphemia was not at all pleased. She thought it was because Peggy
did not love her that she refused to go out with her.

“Very well,” she said; “of course, I do not wish to take a little girl
with me who does not care for me.”

Peggy felt sorry, but she couldn’t explain; it would have spoilt
everything, you know. She stood on the steps and watched Aunt Euphemia
drive away, and then she clapped her hands, and danced off into the
garden. A flight of old stone steps led down from one part of the garden
to another; beside the steps there was a rockery, and Peggy had found
among the stones a lot of lumps of soft white chalk.

She could make her fingers as white as snow by gently rubbing the chalk
over them, but the nicest thing to do with it was to pound it down into
a lovely soft powder with another stone. Peggy sat on the lowest step of
the stone stair and pounded the chalk on the step above her. It was
delightful to do. Among the powder she found here and there a little
white stone. She called them pearls, and decided to make a collection of
them, so that she might string them into a necklace. It was not every
lump of chalk that had a white stone in it, however, as she soon found
out. But this only made it more exciting. The time slipped away so fast
at this game that Peggy couldn’t believe that it really was the tea-bell
she heard. “Why, auntie must have come home,” she thought, “and I must
go in for tea now; but I can come out and hunt for pearls again after
tea.” She gathered up her little white stones in her hand, and went
slowly into the house counting them over in her palm.

“Peggy!” cried Aunt Euphemia.

Peggy had walked into the drawing-room, still counting the treasures.

“Yes, auntie,” she replied. “Oh, do look at my pearls!”

“I’ll look first at your dress, Peggy. What have you been doing to it? I
never saw a child like you for getting into mischief. Ring the bell, and
come here and tell me how you have destroyed your frock.”

Peggy looked down. The front of her blue serge frock was covered all
over with chalk. She seemed to have rubbed it into the stuff in the
strangest way. She was as white as a miller.

“O auntie, I’m sorry! It’s the chalk,” Peggy cried.

“What chalk? Where did you get chalk, and how did you smear it over
yourself in this way?” asked Aunt Euphemia.

“I was finding pearls—such lovely pearls. I am going to make a necklace
of them; see!” said Peggy, holding them out to her aunt to be admired.

“Just bits of stone. What nonsense! Throw them out of the window,” said
Aunt Euphemia. She was much displeased.

Peggy was very obedient. It did not occur to her to refuse to throw the
pearls away. She walked across to the open window, and flung them out
with scarcely any hesitation; but, oh dear, what it cost her! Such a
sore lump came into her throat, and she kept swallowing it down so hard.
Then Martin came in, looking very cross, and carrying a large
cloth-brush, and she was taken to the front door and brushed, and
brushed, to get the chalk away.

“You’ll please not to play _that_ game again,” said Martin crossly.
“It’s a queer thing you can’t be alone half an hour without getting into
mischief.”

Peggy made no answer. Her throat was too sore with trying not to cry.
For nothing else seemed as if it would give her any pleasure again if
she wasn’t allowed to pound chalk and find pearls.

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER V.
                           A VERY BAD CHILD.


Now I must tell you about something naughty that Peggy did. This was how
it came about.

All the rest of the evening Aunt Euphemia and Martin seemed to think
that Peggy was in disgrace, because she had spoilt her frock, and
perhaps also because she was a little bit sulky. It is a horrid thing to
sulk. It does no good; but often one wants to do it so much. Aunt
Euphemia went and sat out in the garden after tea, and made Peggy sit
beside her playing with a doll, and all the time she was anxious to be
pounding chalk instead, so she didn’t care in the least for her doll.
The only thing she could do was to pretend that she was very angry with
the doll, and beat it severely several times. But even this did not make
the evening pass quickly. It was a terribly hot day, and that made Peggy
feel cross also. After supper Aunt Euphemia read aloud what she thought
was a nice story to her; but Peggy didn’t care about it in the least,
and at eight o’clock she was put to bed by Martin, who was still rather
grim.

Peggy’s room was on the ground floor, and had a great big window. She
asked Martin to let her keep the blind up, so that she might look out
and see the ships if she wasn’t asleep; but Martin said that if she
wasn’t asleep she should be, and drew down the blind. Peggy fell asleep
pretty soon after this; but it was so hot that she soon woke and sat up
in bed. It must have been only two or three hours since she went to bed,
for it was still a soft dusk outside, as it often is between ten and
eleven o’clock on a mid-summer night.

“Oh, how hot!” Peggy thought. Then she got up, and walked across the
floor to the window, and lifted the blind. How cool and sweet the garden
was! She stood and looked out, and wondered if every one had gone to
bed, the house sounded so quiet. Then a sudden thought struck her. Why
shouldn’t she get out at the window, and go and play at finding pearls
just now? No one would know, and the chalk wouldn’t leave any mark on
her nightgown. Because it was still light, it never occurred to Peggy to
feel frightened to go out into the garden. She thought it would be the
greatest fun to have her game in spite of Aunt Euphemia and Martin; so
she wriggled on her little white dressing-gown, and drawing a chair to
the window, climbed up on it, and threw up the window very softly.

That was quite easy to do; and oh, it was nice outside! The grass felt
so delicious to her bare feet—so cool and rough. She had to run right
across the lawn to get to the steps, and there were the dear chalk lumps
lying waiting for her, and her pounding-stone!

“I must be _very_ careful not to make a noise, for then Martin might
look out and see me,” she thought; and so she squeezed the chalk
carefully and quietly, and searched among it for the precious little
white stones.

What fun it was to be doing this unknown to any one! And then all of a
sudden the game seemed to lose its pleasure, because Peggy knew quite
well she shouldn’t do it. She would not confess this to herself for some
time, but went on crushing the chalk and thinking. Then she rose a
little uneasily, and laid down her stone, and stood up.

[Illustration]

“I think I must go back to bed, and say my prayer, and perhaps I’ll be
forgiven,” she said to herself.

Just as she stood up, she heard the trot of a horse passing on the road.
The wall was very low which separated the garden from the road, and any
one riding past could see her distinctly as she stood there. The horse
stopped.

“Hullo! is this a little ghost?” said a voice speaking to her.

Peggy was terribly frightened. She knew it was Dr. Seaton’s voice. She
stood, and made no answer.

“Is that you, Peggy?” he asked; “and why are you out here so late at
night?”

Peggy knew it was impossible to hide. She answered in a trembling voice,
“Yes, it’s me; I’m playing.”

“Playing? Does your aunt know? What have you got on?” he asked.

He tied up the horse to a tree, and jumping over the low garden wall,
came to where Peggy stood.

“Child, what are you doing?—bare feet, and scarcely any clothes on!”

“Oh, I _wanted_ to play at it—at pounding chalk; and auntie wouldn’t
let me in the day-time, and I came out, and it was so nice at first, and
then it turned horrid; and, oh, I’m frightened, and I want to go back to
bed!” she sobbed.

“You should be scolded for this, Peggy, but it’s too late for that now.
Come, and I’ll lift you in at your window, and you will soon be asleep
again,” said Dr. Seaton. He stooped down, and lifted Peggy right up in
his arms, and carried her across the lawn to the window. “And now,
suppose I hadn’t happened to see you, how would you have got in there?”
he asked. “You know, Peggy, getting out of a window is a different
matter from getting in at it again.”

The thought of this appalled Peggy. What indeed would she have done?

“_Oh, they would have found out!_” she said in a terrified whisper.

“Don’t you mean to let them find out, as it is?” Dr. Seaton asked very
gravely. “When you do what is wrong, the best thing you can do is to
tell about it, Peggy. But it’s too late for lectures. Get in at the
window, and jump into bed, and go to sleep. Think about your sins in the
morning. Good-night, little one.”

He lifted her through the window, and she landed safely on the chair. It
seemed to Peggy that she must have been out for hours and hours, and she
crept into bed and drew the blankets round her, feeling very much
ashamed indeed. In the distance she heard the trot of Dr. Seaton’s horse
as it went off down the road.

Now I wonder whether Peggy would have had the courage to confess her
adventure to Aunt Euphemia. As it turned out, she was forced to do so;
for the next thing she remembered was Martin standing beside her saying,
“Time to get up, Miss Peggy,” in her cross voice. Peggy was always glad
to jump up; and this morning, though she felt there was something
disagreeable that she couldn’t remember, she jumped up as gladly as
usual. “Come away to your bath,” said Martin, who always superintended
her toilet. Peggy loved her bath, and was playing with the soap and the
sponge when Martin came to hurry her.

“Not in your bath yet? I never saw such a child for putting off time!”
she said.

“I was just floating the big sponge for a minute,” apologized Peggy; but
as she spoke, Martin pounced upon her.

“Mercy me! how ever did you get these feet?” she demanded.

Peggy looked down. Her little white feet were all dabbled with earth
stains and green streaks. The lawn had been very wet with dew, and she
had run across it and then across two of the flower-beds, so the earth
had stuck to her damp feet and stained them brown.

“_Oh!_” said Peggy. She was very frightened. Then she remembered Dr.
Seaton’s advice. “I think, Martin,” she said, “I will go and speak to
auntie alone.” And without more ado, she ran across the passage and into
Aunt Euphemia’s room without giving herself time to think. You will find
this isn’t a bad way of telling about anything you are afraid to tell.

“Please, auntie, I’ve come to show you my feet, and tell. It’s because I
went out last night through the window, after I was put to bed. I wanted
to pound chalk again, and I did for quite a long time, and then I
didn’t, and I went back to bed,” she cried all in a breath, holding up
her night-dress to show the brown earth-stains on her feet. Aunt
Euphemia sat up in bed and stared.

“Peggy!” she exclaimed, “you went out—went out into the garden in your
night-dress!”

“Yes. Please, auntie don’t be very angry. I didn’t mean to do anything
wrong; it was only that I wanted so very much to find some more pearls,”
Peggy pleaded.

Martin came in, grim and rather pleased to have found Peggy out in such
a fault.

“There’s no doing with her, Miss Roberts,” she said—“always in some
mischief or other; and if I may suggest, I think a young lady that could
do so wrong should just be kept in her bed all day. I doubt but she’ll
have got a chill too. A day in bed will just be the best thing for her.”

Aunt Euphemia always agreed with everything Martin said, and Peggy knew
her fate was sealed. Outside, the beautiful, happy world was all green
and bright; but she was going to be put to bed and kept there all day.

“Come away,” said Martin triumphantly; “you must just take your bath,
and then go back to your bed, Miss Peggy. No jam with your bread to-day,
mind.”

So Peggy was bathed and put to bed; and turning her face to the wall,
she wept long and bitterly and repented of her sins.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER VI.
                             A DAY IN BED.


It makes one feel very sick to cry for a long time. Peggy cried till she
was so tired that she had to stop because it hurt her to go on. Her face
was swollen up, and her eyes were red, and she looked quite ugly. But at
last she got so tired that she fell sound asleep, and only wakened up to
have dinner. It was a horrid dinner—cold mutton, rice pudding without
raisins in it, and with no sugar sprinkled over it; that was all.
However, Peggy was wonderfully hungry, and she ate it up. Then came a
very long hour. She sat up in bed, and looked out at the ships; she made
hills and valleys with the sheets, piling them up, and smoothing them
out; she counted the roses on the wall-paper; she plaited the fringe of
the counterpane into dozens of little plaits, and yet the clock in the
hall had only struck three. There was the whole long day to get through!

Then she heard the door-bell ring, and some one was shown into the
drawing-room. She wondered who it could be.

After ten minutes or so, she heard the drawing-room door open again, and
Aunt Euphemia’s voice in the hall, saying,—

“No; Peggy is in bed to-day!”

“In bed? I hope the little woman isn’t ill!” some one said—Dr. Seaton,
Peggy thought, with a throb of delight. Perhaps he would help her.

“No, not ill. I am sorry to say she was a very naughty child. I am
keeping her in bed as a punishment.”

Peggy heard the speakers pause near her door. Dr. Seaton had evidently
stood still as he was going out.

“Not all day, I hope, Miss Roberts,” he said. “It’s not good for the
child in this hot weather. You don’t want to have her ill on your
hands?”

Aunt Euphemia then began to give him the whole history of the night
before; and Dr. Seaton seemed to listen, as if it were all new to him.

“Well, she told you honestly about it, Miss Roberts. Don’t you think
half a day in bed will be enough punishment, this time?” he said.

“I wish to be firm!” said Aunt Euphemia; but there was a sound of
wavering in her voice that made Peggy wriggle in bed with delight, for
she thought her hour of release was coming.

“Suppose you let the child get up now,” Dr. Seaton urged.

“Oh, she will just get into some fresh mischief the moment she is out of
bed. I never saw a child like her,” said Aunt Euphemia; “Martin is quite
worn out with looking after her.”

“I saw that pleasant-looking cook of yours gathering currants in the
kitchen-garden as I came past. Why don’t you let Peggy help her? She
couldn’t get any harm there, I fancy,” said Dr. Seaton. “But I must go
now. Good-bye, Miss Roberts.”

And Peggy heard him run down the steps. Would she be allowed to get up?
She held her breath. Aunt Euphemia came in.

“Peggy, if you are a very good girl you may get up now, and go out into
the kitchen-garden and gather black currants with Janet,” she said.

The words were scarcely uttered before Peggy was out of bed and
struggling into her clothes. She was in such a hurry that she put on her
stockings on the wrong side, and fastened her frock all wrong; but she
managed to get dressed somehow, though she would have been much quicker
if she had not been in such a hurry—which sounds absurd, but is quite
true. Then out into the sunny garden she ran as fast as her feet could
carry her. It was deliciously warm, and such a nice, hot, fruity smell
was all over the place. Janet wore a big straw bonnet, and carried a
basket already half full of black currants.

[Illustration]

She gave Peggy a very warm welcome, for, unlike Martin, she was one of
those people who love children.

“Dearie me, Miss Peggy! This is fine. Come away and see which of us will
gather quickest,” she said. “Here’s a wee basket for you, and a wee one
for me; and you take the one side of the bush, and I’ll have the other,
and see who’ll be first!”

She laid down her large basket between them, and got out the two tiny
baskets instead. It is much nicer to gather fruit in small baskets that
are soon filled, for one seems to be getting on so much quicker. Peggy
worked at a great pace, and actually got her basket full before Janet,
to her great delight. Then it was poured into the large basket, and she
began again. Thus the work went on for an hour at least. Peggy was just
beginning to think she was getting a tiny bit tired, when Janet laid
down her basket suddenly.

“Come in-bye, Miss Peggy,” she said. “I hear the baker’s man at the back
door; maybe he’ll have something for you.”

Peggy followed her to the kitchen, where the baker’s man had just laid
down some loaves on the table. They were still warm, and the crust had
the nicest smell you can imagine.

“I’m thinking you’d like a piece,” said Janet, taking up one of the new
loaves, and looking at Peggy. “It wasn’t much o’ a dinner Martin took
upstairs for ye.”

“That was because I was naughty,” Peggy admitted with a blush.

[Illustration]

“Ye’re no naughty now!” said Janet. She took a knife, and cut a slice of
the nice new bread. Then from the cupboard she took out a round pat of
beautiful fresh butter, stamped with a swan, and spread it thickly on
the bread. Last of all, she sprinkled a lot of sparkling, brown Jamaica
sugar from the sugar-jar over it, and handed the bread to Peggy.

“Oh, _how_ nice! May I sit on the doorstep and eat it?” Peggy cried.

I don’t suppose, though she lived to be a hundred years old, she would
ever forget the taste of that bread and sugar, it was so delicious.

Janet was getting out a huge brass pan from the scullery, and Peggy
wanted to know what it was meant for.

“It’s to make jam in, Miss Peggy; but that’s too hot a job for you.
Maybe if you go and play for an hour and come back, I’ll let you stir
the pan for a minute then,” said Janet. And then, anxious that Peggy
should get into no further mischief that night, she suggested the
washing-green as a safe place to spend the hour in. There were shamrocks
growing there, and clover; and if Peggy could find a four-leaved clover,
she would be lucky all the rest of her life, she assured her.

The washing-green was very cool and pleasant, and Peggy lay on her face
on the grass and searched for that four-leaved clover for a whole hour
without being dull for a minute. Then she heard Janet calling her, and
went running to the kitchen. There the great brass pan was full of
boiling fruit, deep crimson, and with the most delicious smell. Janet
gave her a saucer, and told her that with a large spoon she might skim
the white froth from the edge of the pan. This was great fun to do; and
then she was allowed to taste it, and it was very good. Then Janet took
the huge pan off the fire, and with a cup began to fill up rows and rows
of jars with the jam. Peggy sat on the table and counted the jars, and
was allowed, when they were full, to take a damp cloth and wipe off all
the drops of jam from the edges, so that the jars were all clean and
neat. When all this was done it was quite late, and Janet said Peggy
must go and have her frock changed for the evening now.

“I’ve been _so_ happy, Janet, I want to stay with you,” said Peggy,
flinging her arms round Janet’s neck as she said good-night.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER VII.
                       THE ADVENTURE IN THE LANE.


Peggy had now been for nearly a week at Seafield, and it had not been
very satisfactorily spent.

She arrived on Monday; that evening she had been scratched by Patrick.
On Tuesday morning she had been stung by the wasps, so all Tuesday and
Wednesday were spent in bed. On Thursday she had discovered the game of
chalk-pounding which led her into such trouble that the half of Friday
was spent in bed. Now, on Saturday, surely things would go better with
her. We shall see if they did.

“Martin is busy this morning,” said Aunt Euphemia, “so you must play in
the garden. Try to play quietly, and not spoil your frock this time.
James is there, so surely you cannot get into any mischief.”

Peggy assured her aunt that she would be as careful as possible, and
went out into the garden full of good resolutions. James was very busy
sweeping the avenue. He did not seem to want to talk, so Peggy left him,
and strayed down to the gate. As she stood and looked through the bars
she saw something so interesting that she at once decided to go out and
see it nearer.

Just outside the gate of Seafield there was a bit of waste ground close
to the seashore. On this bit of ground some people were camped. There
was a caravan hung all over with baskets, and this evidently belonged to
these people—a man and woman and three children. As Peggy came up to
the gate, the man was trying to catch the horses and harness them to the
caravan. She watched this with great interest. Then she saw that there
was a donkey also, so she could not resist the temptation any longer.
Out she went through the gate and spoke to the woman. “If you please,”
she said, “may I pat your donkey?”

The woman smiled and said, “Oh yes, that you may, missie,” and called to
the children to catch the donkey and bring it to Peggy to pat. It was a
lovely donkey, pale brown, with a long black cross upon its back, as all
donkeys have. Peggy had been told the legend about the cross on the
donkeys’ backs, so she stroked the long black mark gravely all the way
down the little beast’s back, remembering about the story.

“Do you live in that nice place among the baskets?” she asked the woman.

“Yes, missie, and drive around the country in it all the day,” said the
woman. “Would you like to come inside and see it?”

Peggy was delighted. She jumped in and saw what a funny little house it
must be to live in.

“We’re just movin’ on, miss,” said the man, coming to the door to help
Peggy out. The horses had been harnessed now, and the donkey was tied to
run behind the caravan.

“Oh, _please_,” said Peggy, “mightn’t I just have the littlest ride with
you? Won’t you take me along the road?”

“Oh yes, missie. ’Twon’t do us no harm,” said the man good-naturedly. He
cracked his whip, and the caravan swayed as if it would fall over to one
side, and then off they went, rumbling slowly along the sea-road. The
woman gave Peggy a seat, and chatted away to her in the kindest way.

“This is fun,” said Peggy, and never gave a thought as to whether she
had been wise in doing this. She told the woman all about herself, and
how she had come to pay her aunt a visit, and how horrid Martin was, and
how nice Janet was. But at last the cart drew up, and the man came to
the door.

“You must be going home, missie,” he said; “I don’t want to take you too
far.” Peggy pleaded just to be taken to the next corner; so he said he
would do that, but she must get out there.

“There’s a good little lady. Run home straight; take the first turn on
the right, and you’ll be home in ten minutes,” he said, lifting Peggy
down.

“I’m _very_ sorry. I would like to drive on and on with you,” said
Peggy. And at that the man reached up to the roof of the caravan, and
pulled down a sweet little green basket, and gave it to Peggy as a
present. Then he cracked his whip again, and the caravan rumbled off
down the road.

Peggy watched till it was out of sight. Then she began to admire her
dear little green basket. “I must fill it with something,” she thought,
and looked round to see what would be nicest to fill it with. There was
a gate close by leading into a field, and Peggy saw such lovely large
ox-eye daisies growing there that she at once wished to have them. The
gate was rather stiff to open, but she managed it, and waded in among
the high grass, and pulled and pulled at the daisies till her basket was
overflowing. By this time she had walked right across the field, and
instead of returning to the gate Peggy stupidly thought she would go
through a gap in the hedge and come round. So through she went, and came
into another road very like the one she had left. She trotted off down
the road, arranging her daisies, and very happy. But after a little she
found it was not the road she had come by, and she began to feel a
little confused. She turned and ran back, but couldn’t see the gap in
the hedge. Then Peggy was frightened. There was no one anywhere near,
and she had no idea how to get home. She ran on, and then ran back,
getting more and more frightened and confused, and at last she sat down
on a heap of stones and began to cry.

Such a feeling of loneliness came over her! She thought that she must
now be miles and miles away from home, and that she would never see it
again. In reality Peggy was only about one mile from Seafield, and if
she had been sensible, and thought how to cross the field with the
daisies again, she would probably have found her way back quite easily.
But it is difficult to be sensible when you are frightened; so instead
of thinking, Peggy sat and cried helplessly by the roadside. It was a
very lonely road. No one passed, and there was not a house in sight
anywhere. She began to feel hungry too, and that made her cry worse, for
she thought she would perhaps never get any food again, and would die of
hunger.

Just then, as Peggy had come to this dismal conclusion, she saw two
figures coming along the road. One was a woman in a shawl carrying a
large basket, the other was a little girl. Peggy ran towards them
crying,—

“Oh, I’ve lost my way; I can’t get home; will you tell me where to go?”
She had been so frightened that she spoke without looking at the woman,
and when she did look at her, she saw that her face was not at all a
pleasant one. She looked very sly and nasty, and Peggy shrank back from
her, and felt inclined to run away—only there was no one else who could
help her.

“Where’s your home then?” said the woman, laying her hand on Peggy’s
shoulder and looking hard at her.

“Oh, my home is with my Aunt Euphemia, and her house is called Seafield,
and I can’t find it,” sobbed Peggy.

“Well, I’ll show you the way back, if you give me something for my
trouble,” the woman said.

“I’ve nothing to give you but my little basket,” said Peggy.

“That pretty dress would please me better, and them brown shoes,” said
the woman. “Just sit down there and take them off; they’ll be about the
size for my Bessie here.”

“I’ll give you my shoes,” said poor Peggy; “but really I can’t give you
my frock, for how could I walk home in my petticoat?”

“Give me the shoes then,” said the woman. So down sat Peggy on the heap
of stones, and tugged off her brown shoes, and handed them to the woman,
who tucked them into her basket. “And now I’ll just have them brown
stockings too,” she said.

Peggy pulled off her stockings, and stood up on her little bare white
feet. “Now, _please_, show me the way home,” she said.

“Well, I must have the frock too. Look at Bessie all in rags,” said the
woman.

She glanced up and down the road to see that no one was coming, and then
hastily began to pull off Peggy’s frock.

“I’m not giving it to you; you’re stealing it from me!” cried Peggy
indignantly. But the woman said that unless she gave her the frock she
would not tell her the way home. So Peggy had just to allow herself to
be undressed on the road.

[Illustration]

The woman packed the dress into the basket. “Now,” she said, “walk right
down the road till you come to where two roads cross, then go to the
right.” Peggy believed her, and ran away down the road as hard as she
could run. In reality the woman knew no more than Peggy about the roads,
for she was a vagrant who was only passing through the country. All she
wanted was to get Peggy as far away as possible.

On and on Peggy ran, always looking for the cross roads that never came.
Her poor little feet were covered with dust, and they began to get very
painful, for she was accustomed to wear shoes always. Then it felt
exceedingly queer to be running along the road in a petticoat. Peggy
didn’t like it at all, but she was getting so tired that she could think
of nothing but how to get home, and home was really getting farther and
farther away from her at every step she took. At last, at the corner of
the road, Peggy saw a trough where horses drink, and she was so tired
and thirsty that she sat down on the edge and began to suck up the water
in the palm of her hand.

As she sat there, she heard the sound of wheels coming along the road,
and a little carriage came in sight, driven by a pretty young lady.
Peggy felt ashamed of her own appearance, sitting there in her petticoat
all covered with dust; but she decided that she must ask the lady to
help her, however queer she was looking. So she ran forward into the
road, and called out as the carriage came up.

The lady stopped her pony, and the groom jumped down and held its head.

“Is anything wrong with you, my dear?” the lady asked. “And how did you
get here without your frock?”

“Oh, I’ve lost my way; I can’t get home,” cried Peggy. And indeed her
tear-stained face and her strange garments told their own story.

The lady told Peggy to jump into the carriage, and then she wrapped her
round in a linen dust-rug to keep her warm.

“If you tell me where you come from I will drive you home, dear,” she
said; and Peggy felt her troubles were ended at last.

It only took half an hour to reach Seafield after all. Peggy was almost
ashamed to have been so frightened when she had been so near home, but
then she had not known.

Oh, what a commotion they found Aunt Euphemia in! She had been searching
far and near for Peggy for two hours, and not a trace of her had been
found. At last Aunt Euphemia had begun to fear that Peggy had been
drowned in the sea; and Martin, who always took the darkest view of
everything, was trying to make her believe this.

“Miss Peggy’s drowned in the firth by this time, ma’am,” she was saying
with a grim shake of her head, just as the carriage containing Peggy
drew up at the door.

Aunt Euphemia ran out to the door, and for the first time in her life
caught Peggy up in her arms and hugged her, she was so glad to get her
alive and well.

And then there was all the story to tell. Peggy was too tired with her
adventures to be able to tell the story so that any one could understand
it. She just told a confused tale of baskets and little girls and a
horrid woman; and then, worn out with it all, she began to cry again
most piteously.

Even Aunt Euphemia didn’t scold her, and Martin brought her a nice
dinner, and made her eat it all up, and then took her upstairs and laid
her down to sleep; and this was the end of Peggy’s adventures for that
day.




                             CHAPTER VIII.
                               THE SHIP.


The next morning was Sunday, and Peggy’s heart sank when her aunt said
to her, “I think I won’t let you out of my sight to-day, Peggy, for
something always happens whenever you go even into the garden alone.”

“It seems to,” Peggy admitted sadly, but she did not like the idea of
remaining all day long with Aunt Euphemia.

Church was long and hot, and then there was dinner, and then Aunt
Euphemia said she would read Peggy a story. Peggy did not care about
this; she wanted to go out, and yet did not dare to say so. But just as
they were sitting down to read, Dr. Seaton came in, and Peggy was
delighted to have the reading stopped.

“I’ve come to take Peggy with me to the harbour, if you will allow it,
Miss Roberts,” he said. “I promised to take her there some day, and I
have more time this afternoon than on week days.”

Aunt Euphemia was really rather pleased to get Peggy off her hands for
an hour. She was feeling sleepy, and it was a bother to her to look
after Peggy, so she consented to Dr. Seaton’s proposal without any
difficulty.

It was not a long walk to the harbour, where there was much to see.

“I am going to take you on to a Danish ship,” Dr. Seaton said; “you will
hear the men talking a queer language you have never heard before, and
the captain will take you down into his cabin, I dare say.”

The Danish ship was lying close up to the quay. It was painted very
bright emerald green, and Dr. Seaton pointed out to Peggy the figure of
a woman made of wood and painted white which was at the bow of the ship.

“Poor lady, she goes through all the storms with her white dress. When
she comes into harbour after a winter storm she is crusted over with
salt from the waves,” he said.

“Why do they have a wooden lady at the end of the ship?” Peggy asked.

“Because they think it brings luck to the ship,” said Dr. Seaton.

They came to the side of the quay, and he called to some of the sailors,
and they came running forward to lift Peggy on board.

[Illustration]

Sailors are always specially clean and tidy on Sunday, dressed in their
best clothes. They were such nice-looking men—tall, with yellow hair;
and Peggy noticed the rings in their ears at once. Of course, she
couldn’t speak to them, or at least they couldn’t understand what she
said; but the captain took her hand, and led her all round the ship,
letting her look at everything she wanted to see—the huge anchor, all
red with rust, that took ever so many men to lift; and what interested
Peggy more than anything—the cargo of tubs that the ship had brought
over. There were tubs of every imaginable size, down to tiny ones of
white wood.

“Oh, I could wash my doll’s clothes in these!” Peggy cried. She wanted
one dreadfully, and yet didn’t know how to get it, for the man wouldn’t
understand about her doll. As she was standing there saying, “Doll,
doll, doll,” and looking wistfully at the dear little tubs, Dr. Seaton
came round again from the cabin where he had been seeing a boy with a
broken arm.

“Oh, I do want a tub to wash my doll’s clothes in so dreadfully!” Peggy
cried, “and he doesn’t understand what I mean.”

Dr. Seaton said something in German, and in a minute the captain began
to pull out dozens of tubs for Peggy to choose from. But she was not
quite pleased till she had explained through Dr. Seaton that she wanted
to buy the tub. “I would never _ask_ for anything,” she
explained—“mother doesn’t let me do that; and I’ve got a whole shilling
of my own to pay it with.”

Dr. Seaton had to explain this to the captain, and they both laughed a
great deal.

“But you must pay it for me just now please, Dr. Seaton, because I
haven’t my shilling with me,” Peggy explained; and then a horrid fear
overcame her that perhaps Dr. Seaton did not carry so much money about
with him either, and she would have to go away without her tub; and he
had told her that the ship would sail next morning!

She began to look very dismal at this thought, while Dr. Seaton was
feeling in his pocket; but to her great relief he drew out quite a
handful of shillings, and gave one to the captain, who took it and
laughed again.

“There now, Peggy; you can choose which you like best,” he said.

[Illustration]

It took Peggy a very long time to make up her mind. At last she chose a
beautiful little tub, oval shaped, bound with three hoops of white wood,
and with two handles to lift it by. Dr. Seaton wanted to hold it for
her, but Peggy wouldn’t let it out of her own hands, she was so well
pleased with it.

The captain told her that the tubs came from a place in Russia with a
funny name—Archangel; and that pleased Peggy even more, because it was
so much more interesting to have an Archangel tub than an ordinary
Scotch or English one.

Then the captain led the way down into his cabin. The cabin of a ship
like this is not like that of a large passenger steamer. It is almost as
small and dark as a cupboard, and has only just room for a tiny table
and two or three chairs. The table was securely fixed to the floor, so
that when the sea was rough with big waves it should not slide about.

The captain brought out from a cupboard a funny-shaped bottle, and the
smallest glasses Peggy had ever seen. He poured a little stuff out of
the bottle into the glasses, and offered one to Dr. Seaton, who took it
and smiled; then the captain took one, and held it out, and knocked the
edge of the little glasses together, making a tinkling sound like a
bell.

“What does he do that for?” Peggy asked.

“It’s a way of being friendly and polite in Denmark,” Dr. Seaton
replied.

Then they both smiled and nodded again, and each drank off the stuff
from the glass.

“Let me taste, please,” said Peggy, standing on tip-toe by the table.

“You would think it horrid,” said Dr. Seaton, laughing; “it would burn
your throat.”

“Oh, just a _tiny_ taste—just the tip of my tongue; I want to so much,”
said Peggy.

[Illustration]

So the captain poured another drop into the tiny glass, and tinkled the
edge against his own; and Peggy, thinking she must imitate Dr. Seaton’s
manners, bowed and smiled and tried to give the same funny gulp down of
the liquid as he had done. But there was only a drop at the bottom of
the glass, and that drop was such horrid stuff, it was like trying to
swallow mustard, Peggy thought. She coughed, and coughed, and coughed
till her eyes filled with tears, and both the men stood laughing at her.

“That will cure you of drinking habits, young woman,” said Dr. Seaton,
“Now we must say good-bye and come home.”

Peggy was very sorry to leave the ship, for there seemed to be all
manner of queer things to see there still. But she said good-bye to the
captain very nicely—so nicely that he told her to wait for a minute;
and going to the cupboard, he drew out from it a huge scarlet shell,
which he handed to Peggy with a bow.

“O Peggy, that is a present you will like!” said Dr. Seaton.

Peggy could scarcely believe her own good luck. The shell was so
perfectly beautiful; and Dr. Seaton showed her also that if she held it
to her ear she would hear a rushing noise inside it.

“O captain, thank you _very, very_ much,” said Peggy, quite overcome
with delight.—“I think you must carry the tub, Dr. Seaton, for I can’t
give my shell out of my hands,” she said.

Dr. Seaton translated her thanks to the captain, and he seemed very
pleased, and told Peggy he had a little girl on the other side of the
sea just her age. Peggy stood still looking very uncertain and sad at
this bit of news. Then she pulled at Dr. Seaton’s hand and whispered
something to him. She felt it was her duty to say so, but it was so
difficult that she could not say it out loud. It was this,—

“Won’t his little daughter want the shell?”

She waited very impatiently to hear what answer the captain would make;
but, to her great relief, he said that his daughter had lots of shells,
because he took them home to her from almost every voyage. Then they all
shook hands, and Peggy was lifted up on to the quay again, clasping her
large red shell.

“I shall always be able to hear the sea now, even when I go home far
away from it,” she said.

When they reached Seafield, Peggy ran into her room, and came back with
a little netted purse in her hand. Out of this she took her shilling,
and gave it to Dr. Seaton for the tub. But Dr. Seaton would not take the
shilling, and Peggy was quite distressed, and turned to Aunt Euphemia to
know what she ought to do. “Please, auntie, I bought a tub, and now Dr.
Seaton won’t take my shilling,” she said. Aunt Euphemia, too, tried to
make him take it, but all in vain.

So Peggy had to replace the shilling in her purse, and thank him very
much.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER IX.
                            THE WASHING DAY.


Monday morning was hopelessly wet. The rain came down in sheets, and the
garden looked like a pond. But Peggy was delighted. “It’s such a good
washing day,” she explained to her aunt, “and all my doll’s things are
so black.”

[Illustration]

Aunt Euphemia suggested that Janet would allow the washing to go on in
the kitchen; and Peggy at once ran away to fetch the doll’s clothes and
her little tub, and carry them all to the kitchen. Janet was very
pleased. She put the tub on a stool, so that it should be just the right
height for Peggy to wash at, and filled the tub with nice soapy hot
water.

Then she pinned up Peggy’s sleeves to her shoulders, and together they
undressed the doll (which was a baby one, in long white robes), and laid
its clothes in a heap on a chair.

Peggy would have liked to wash them all at once, but Janet told her that
washerwomen did things one at a time, so she consented to do this. The
doll’s long, tucked white robe was the first to go into the tub. It was
not indeed very white, for it had got rather dirty on the railway
journey.

[Illustration]

“Rub it all over with soap, Miss Peggy,” Janet said, and Peggy rubbed on
the soap as hard as she could. How the water fluffed up! it almost
filled the tub, and Peggy had to part the frothy suds away with her hand
to see to rub the cloth. After the robe had been well washed, Janet gave
Peggy a basin full of clean water to rinse the soap out of it, and then
she took a ball like a big blue cherry, wrapped it in a bit of muslin,
and shook it about in the water. The water became bright blue too!

“Now, Miss Peggy, put the robe in,” said Janet. Peggy was afraid to do
it; she thought it would come out bright blue. But Janet assured her it
would only have a nice bluish look that would make the white whiter; and
Peggy believed her, and dipped the robe in the blue. It came out as
white and nice as possible.

Then Janet hung it before the kitchen stove to dry, and Peggy saw that
on the stove Janet had put the dearest little iron to heat.

“Am I to iron it out my own self, Janet?” she asked.

“Oh yes, Miss Peggy, that you are.”

It took only a few minutes for the frock to dry, and then Janet put a
blanket with a sheet over it upon the lid of a large box, and gave the
box to Peggy for an ironing table.

The little iron was not at all difficult to manage, and Peggy found that
it was delightful to squeeze all the creases out of her doll’s robe. It
looked as good as new when it was done.

“Why, Janet, Belinda won’t ever need new robes at all; I can go on
washing and washing them,” Peggy said.

There remained, however, all Belinda’s under-clothes to be washed; and
before they were half finished, Peggy began to think that washing was
rather hard work.

“My hands feel so queer, Janet,” she said, drawing them out of the soapy
water. They looked indeed most strange; the skin was all crinkled up in
the funniest way. “Oh, look!” Peggy cried in dismay.

Janet assured her they would come right in a very short time. “But I’m
thinking you’ve washed enough, Miss Peggy, for one day; maybe I’ll
finish it for you,” she said.

Peggy wasn’t altogether sorry. “Well, Janet, if you will be so kind as
to finish for me, I will go and listen to my shell,” she said, “and
perhaps my hands will stop feeling funny.”

There was a small library at Seafield where Peggy was allowed to play by
herself. She liked the room much better than the drawing-room, because
there were such lots of books with nice pictures in them. Those she
liked best were Hume’s “History,” with pictures of the kings and queens,
and Blair’s “Grave,” with illustrations by a man called William Blake.
Peggy used to spread the large book upon the floor and pore over the
pictures. She didn’t understand them, but that only made them more
interesting. To-day, instead of looking at the pictures, she got her red
shell, and sat down on the corner of the sofa holding the shell to her
ear. The rushing sound in the shell was just like the noise of the sea
outside, and Peggy listened to it for a long time. Then getting a little
tired of this, she went to the window and looked out. The rain had
stopped, and the sun was beginning to come out. The thrushes were
singing as if they liked the rain, and Peggy thought it would be nice to
go out and see what it felt like also. So she went out to the front
door, and stood there looking out. Then she stepped out on to the
gravel; then she ran a little bit down the avenue; then she came to the
gate and looked out at the sea; and then a new thought struck her—why
should she not look to see if she could find any lovely red shells on
the beach? The tide was out; there was a stretch of sand with little
pools and rocks covered with seaweed: surely in these pools or on the
sands she might find a red shell for herself! This was stupid of Peggy,
for shells like that the captain gave her come from tropic seas, not
from our own sea; but she did not know this.

Out Peggy skipped along the shining sand. It was firm and nice to run
on, and she wondered she had not done this long ago; it was far nicer
than the garden. Her feet made tracks on the sand like the footprint
Crusoe saw, she thought. Then she came to a pool with little seaweedy
rocks in it. The first thing she saw there made her stand still with
interest: it was a lot of things like little red flowers growing on the
edge of the rock. But when she put her hand down and tried to get one,
she found it was alive; and when she touched it, it drew in all its
waving red feelers, and became like a lump of red-currant jelly fixed to
the rock! “I hope I didn’t hurt it,” Peggy thought. She leant over the
pool and watched it till it cautiously put out first one feeler and then
another, and at last it looked as pretty as ever again and as much
alive. Peggy wondered what it was called. Then down on the slushy sand
at her feet Peggy saw a great big lump of jelly, six times as large as
the little one in the pool. It didn’t look very nice, she thought, but
she wondered if, when it was put into the water, it would bloom out like
the other. The only way to find this out was to lift it into the pool,
but Peggy hesitated about doing this. Then she saw a long flat stone
like a slate lying near, and taking this in her hand, she tried to slip
it under the “jelly beast,” as she called it. But the jelly beast didn’t
seem to like being disturbed, and it sank down and down into the soft
sand till it almost disappeared. Peggy became more and more anxious to
get it. She dug her slate down into the sand, and at last, with a great
effort, lifted the jelly beast, along with a great lump of sand, and
flung it into the pool. Then she sat down to watch it. To her great joy
it began, just like the other one, to put out one feeler after another,
till it lay there at the bottom of the pond like a big pink rose. “Oh,
it’s lovely; I _do_ want to have it for my own!” she cried. “I wonder if
I would be allowed to have it in my tub.” She bent down to look nearer,
and under the fringe of seaweed suddenly she saw something shining red.
She plunged her hand down and grabbed the prize. But, oh dear me! the
next moment she screamed and screamed. It was a large red crab she had
caught at, and the crab had caught her! Have you seen the crabs lying in
the fish-shop windows twitching their claws? They look harmless enough,
but with these claws they can hold on in the most terrible way, once
they catch hold of you. Oh, how Peggy screamed! She ran towards the
house splashing through the pools, with the big red crab hanging on to
her hand. She was in an agony of pain and terror. The sound of her
screams brought James running from the garden. Peggy ran straight to
him, calling out for help; and James caught up a stone, and gave the
crab such a blow on its claw that it let go in a moment, and fell to the
ground. Peggy’s finger was bleeding a good deal, and he took out his own
handkerchief and bound it up for her, and then took her other hand and
led her, still sobbing, up to the house.

[Illustration]

“We’ll gang into Janet, missie,” he said wisely. He knew that Janet was
a more comforting person than Martin, and Peggy thought so too. Janet
took her on her knee, and kissed her and wiped her eyes, and looked at
the poor nipped finger till gradually Peggy stopped crying. Then Janet
took her to the pump, and washed her face and hands, and began to tell
her a funny story about a crab that had nipped her own finger once, till
Peggy found herself laughing instead of crying.

When she was quite happy again, Janet said to Peggy that they would go
together and tell Aunt Euphemia all about it. Peggy was a little
frightened, but Janet said she must do it, and together they went into
the drawing-room.

Here it seemed to Peggy that Janet took all the blame on herself. She
told Aunt Euphemia how she had allowed Peggy to go away from the
kitchen, and had not looked after her, and how Peggy had gone out alone,
and then she told the sad story of the crab. And Aunt Euphemia, instead
of being angry, accepted the excuses Janet made, for she was very fond
of Janet, and never thought anything she did was wrong.

“Maybe, ma’am, you would let me take Miss Peggy to the shore myself?”
Janet asked; “then she’d get no mischief.”

“Indeed, Janet, I see she must never be left alone for a minute; so when
your work is done, you may certainly take the child out with you,” said
Aunt Euphemia.

“Come away then, Miss Peggy,” said Janet; “ye’ll bide wi’ me till I make
the currant tart, and in the afternoon we can gang till the shore.”

Peggy ran off to the kitchen as happy as possible to make the currant
tart, and Janet told her that they would go down to the shore together,
carrying Peggy’s tub, and fill it with all manner of sea beasts, and
bring them back to the house. And wasn’t this a delightful suggestion?

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER X.
                            THE SEA BEASTS.


It was wonderful how many sea creatures Peggy and Janet found when they
began. The little tub was quite full before long, and Peggy, looking
into it, told Janet that she was afraid they wouldn’t be very
comfortable.

Janet considered for a minute, and then told Peggy that there was an old
washing-tub in the scullery which she was sure her aunt would let her
use instead of her own little one; then there would be room enough for
all the creatures to be happy.

“But how would we ever get a washing-tub filled with water out of the
sea?” Peggy asked.

[Illustration]

“Hoots! James and me can carry it up in pails,” said Janet.

“Will _you_ ask Aunt Euphemia about it?” Peggy asked. She had begun to
see that Janet could get anything she wanted. Janet said that she would,
and went off to gain Aunt Euphemia’s consent to the scheme. She came
back smiling, and Peggy knew all was right, so she clapped her hands
with delight.

“O Janet, do you think James will get the water to-night?” she cried.
“For it would be horrid if my poor beasts died, or were sick for want of
it.”

Janet then went off to look for James, and before long Peggy had the joy
of seeing him come toiling up the walk, carrying two huge pails of
water. Then Janet went down to the sea again with two pails, and brought
them back filled, and James brought two more, and when they had all been
poured into the tub it was quite full.

“Now I can put in my beasts!” Peggy cried.

[Illustration]

The first of all was a great prize: it was a bit of stone with two sea
anemones attached to it. Sea anemones are the creatures that Peggy had
seen in the pool that were like little pink flowers. Janet had explained
to her that it hurt anemones to be scraped off the rocks, and so they
had to hunt till they found them growing on a small stone that it was
possible to lift. It had been some time before they found this, but at
last, at the bottom of a pool, Janet spied a small stone with two
beautiful anemones sticking to it. Whenever she lifted the stone out of
the water, the funny little creatures drew in all their pretty
petal-like feelers, and became like lumps of red-currant jelly; but the
moment Peggy placed them in the tub of water, out came the feelers one
by one till they were as pretty as ever again.

Then there was one of the big ones that had been scooped out of the sand
with great difficulty, and was rather offended evidently, for it took a
long time to put out its feelers—just lay and sulked on the bottom of
the tub. Peggy watched it for a long time, but as it wouldn’t put out
its feelers, she turned to the other creatures.

[Illustration]

There were a number of whelks. Whelks, you know, are sea-snails. They
live in shells, and draw themselves in and out of them very quickly. The
moment Peggy put them into the tub, they pushed their shells on to their
backs as snails do, and began crawling slowly along the edges of the
tub.

“O Janet, my whelks will walk out and get lost!” Peggy cried. But Janet
told her she thought they liked the water best, and would stay in it.

[Illustration]

Then there were three mussels. Mussels live in tight, dark blue shells;
but when they please they can open their shells, much as you open a
portfolio, for there is a kind of hinge at the back of the shell.
However, they too were sulky, and lay still quite tight shut.

Janet had picked up a very large shell, and put it into the tub, and
Peggy asked her why. She said they would see before long. Now she took
the large shell and laid it in the water. Peggy watched, and suddenly
she saw a thin green leg come stealing out; then another and another,
till at last a tiny green crab came scrambling altogether out of the
shell, and ran rapidly about the tub.

“O Janet, it’s a little crab! How did you know? Do they always live in
these big snail shells?” Peggy cried.

Janet told her that they were called hermit crabs, and that they lived
in the cast-off shells of other creatures, just using them as houses.

“Put your hand into the water, Miss Peggy, and you will see him run in,”
Janet said.

Peggy shook her hand in the water, and saw the little crab scuttle away
and get into his shell like lightning.

[Illustration]

Janet had wanted to add a big red crab, like the one that nipped Peggy,
but Peggy wouldn’t have it. There were some limpets, in their little
pyramid-shaped shells, and then Janet had added a lot of seaweed of
different kinds. Some of it was slimy green stuff, like long green hair,
which Peggy didn’t at all admire; but there were pretty feathery pink
weed and nice brown dulse.

“I wonder if James could get a flounder,” Janet said thoughtfully.

Peggy asked what a flounder was, and Janet said it was the kind of flat
little fish Peggy had had fried for breakfast that morning.

“They’re ill to catch,” she added. “But maybe James could get ye ane.”

“Oh, a fish—a real live fish—in my tub would be so _delicious_!” cried
Peggy.

She ran off to beg James to try to catch one for her; and James, who was
very obliging, went off once again to the shore with a pail in search of
a flounder.

Peggy stood and watched him for quite half an hour as he went slowly
across the sands, stooping over each pool to see if there were flounders
in it.

At last he came back, and Peggy scarcely liked to ask him whether he had
got one, for she felt it would be so disappointing if he hadn’t—her
collection would be quite incomplete. But James was grinning with
pleasure, and he showed her two nice brown flounders in the pail.

“Oh, they _are_ flat!” cried Peggy.

She dived her hands into the pail, and attempted to catch them—quite in
vain. Then James slowly poured away all the water on to the ground, and
there the flounders lay, flopping about at the bottom of the pail. Peggy
was almost afraid to touch them, but James said they would do her no
harm; so she caught hold of one of the slippery, wriggling little fish,
and flung it into the tub, and it darted off and hid itself under the
seaweed. Then she put in the other flounder, and it also hid under the
seaweed, where it couldn’t be seen.

“I think they must be sleepy, and be going to bed,” Peggy said. And
then, quite tired out with her exertions, she rubbed her eyes and
yawned, till Janet told her it was time for her to go to bed like the
flounders; and Peggy agreed that it was.

[Illustration]




                              CHAPTER XI.
                       THE LAST DAY AT SEAFIELD.


Now, if Peggy had taken time to think about it, she was only going to
make herself unhappy by collecting all these delightful creatures in the
tub; for her visit to Seafield was to come to an end on Wednesday, and
this was Monday evening. The whole of Tuesday morning Peggy thought of
nothing but her dear sea beasts. She stood beside the tub and watched
them; she crumbled a bit of bread very fine, and flung it into the
water, and actually saw one of the flounders eat a crumb; she chased the
hermit crab into its shell a dozen times, and watched the whelks move
slowly along the side of the tub. It was the nicest amusement she had
ever had. But in the afternoon Aunt Euphemia said that they were going
to drive to the station.

“Your father is coming for you, Peggy, you know; he is going to take you
home to-morrow.”

Peggy was very fond of her father—so fond that she had cried when she
said good-bye to him last week. It surprised Aunt Euphemia extremely
that, instead of being glad to hear of his coming, Peggy seemed sorry,
for she burst into tears.

“Why, Peggy, are you not glad to see your father?” said Aunt Euphemia.

“I don’t want to go home!” Peggy sobbed.

Aunt Euphemia was rather pleased. “Do you want to stay with me then,
dear?” she asked.

“No; it’s my sea beasts. Oh, oh, oh!” sobbed Peggy. “Do you think father
will take the tub of sea beasts back in the train with us?”

No wonder Aunt Euphemia was hurt. It was nasty of Peggy to say that she
only wanted to stay because of the sea beasts.

“Of course, he will do nothing of the kind,” said Aunt Euphemia. “All
the beasts must be put back into the sea to-night.”

She walked away and left Peggy to cry alone. But after she had cried for
some time, Peggy remembered that father was different from Aunt
Euphemia, and perhaps would not distress her by making her part from the
dear sea beasts. So she dried her eyes, and thought perhaps it was as
well that he was coming.

The drive to the station was quite dull. Nothing happened, for Peggy
wasn’t allowed to sit on the box-seat with the driver as she wanted to,
but had to sit beside her aunt in the carriage. At the station, too,
there was very little to notice—only some sheep in a truck, looking
very unhappy. Peggy gathered some blades of grass, and held them to the
sheep, and they nibbled them up. Then the train came puffing in, and the
next minute she saw her father jump out of a carriage, and come along
the platform to where she was. Peggy was so delighted to see him that
she ran right at him, and caught hold of his knees so that she nearly
made him fall. Then she took his hand, and began telling him everything
at once, in such a hurry that it was impossible for him to understand
anything she said.

“Not so fast, Peggy. Wait till we are in the carriage,” he said,
laughing.

It seemed a very long time till they were all packed in, and then Peggy
had to climb on to her father’s knee and put her arm round his neck.
“Now may I begin?” she asked.

“Yes, sweetest; tell me all about everything now,” her father said. And
Peggy began her story, of course, at the wrong end.

“I’ve got a tub full of such dear sea beasts, father,” she said. “There
are two flounders, and a lot of whelks, and a hermit crab, and two
anemones fixed on a stone, and a big one stuck on to the foot of the
tub, and I watch them all day; and, please, how am I to take them home?”

“Well, I must come and see them first,” her father said.

“And please, father, I got lost one day, and had my frock stolen—the
new one—and the bees stung me, and a crab nipped my finger, and I was
very naughty once—only once—and I went on to a green ship, and—and—”

“Why, Peggy, you seem to have had a week of the most extraordinary
adventures; it will be quite dull to come home.”

Peggy wasn’t quite sure about this. She had so many things she was fond
of at home, that if only she might take her sea beasts back with her,
she thought she would be quite happy to return. She sat still for a few
minutes thinking about this, while Aunt Euphemia spoke to her father.
But the moment the carriage stopped at the door, she seized her father’s
hand, and begged him to come and see her tub of sea beasts.

“Not till after tea, Peggy; I’ll come then,” he said.

Peggy would have liked him to come there and then, but she knew she must
wait.

Tea seemed longer than usual. Her father told her to be quiet, so she
ate away without uttering a word, and listened to all the dull things
Aunt Euphemia was saying. At last, when tea was over, she came round to
where her father sat, and took hold of his hand, and gave it a little
squeeze, which she knew he would understand.

[Illustration]

“Yes, dearest!” he said, but waited to hear the end of what Aunt
Euphemia was saying. “Now, Peggy,” he said at last, “come along;” and
together they went out to the garden, and came to the tub. Peggy looked
in.

“Why, father,” she cried, “my crab is floating on his back! Isn’t it
funny of him?”

Colonel Roberts examined the crab for a minute.

“I’m afraid he’s dead, Peggy,” he said. “They don’t turn up their toes
that way unless they’re dead.”

Peggy knelt down, so as to come nearer to the tub, and looked down into
it. Then she uttered a little wail. “O father, I think they’re _all_
looking sick somehow! Look at my flounders!”

One of the flounders, alas! was dead already, as well as the crab, and
the other looked rather sorry for himself. Colonel Roberts, however,
would not let Peggy cry.

“Look here, child,” he said; “they want to be put back into the
sea—that’s all. There are too many of them all crowded together in the
tub; we’ll take them back to a pool on the shore, and they will soon be
as frisky as ever again.”

“Not the dead ones,” said Peggy solemnly.

“No, not the poor dead ones, but the sick ones. Go and fetch me a pail,
and we’ll carry them down to the shore.”

“But then I won’t ever see them again,” Peggy objected.

“Now, don’t be a selfish little girl. You would rather they lived and
were happy, wouldn’t you?”

“Ye—s,” Peggy faltered.

“Well, go and fetch the pail.”

After all, it would be good fun to put them all back into the sea, Peggy
thought; so she ran away and fetched the garden pail from the shed.
Colonel Roberts pulled up his sleeves, and dived his arm into the tub,
and fished up the creatures one by one. They all looked rather flabby
and sick.

“Now, we must take them down to the shore,” he said.

They selected a nice large pool, and one by one placed the poor sick
creatures into it. Then Peggy sat down to watch. She had not long to
wait: the sick flounder revived in the most extraordinary manner, the
anemones began to wave their feelers about in the nice clean water as if
they too felt all right.

“See! they are all quite happy again, Peggy,” said her father.

“Oh, I _am_ sorry not to keep them,” said she. “Do you think I’ll ever
get anything to play with that I can love so much?”

“Well, that depends upon yourself, Peggy; but as we walk back to the
house you can guess what I’ve got for you at home.”

“Have you got something new for me—something I’ll love?”

“Yes, quite new. I fancy you’ll love it very much.”

“As much as my sea beasts?”

“Oh, a great deal more. What do you think would be the nicest thing you
could have?”

“A Shetland pony?”

“No, far nicer.”

“A big Persian pussy-cat?”

“No, nicer still.”

Peggy began to dance with impatience. “Oh, do tell me; what is it?” she
cried.

“Well, you will find a new sister at home, very small and pink, with
blue eyes and a lot of nice black hair.”

Peggy received this description dumbly; indeed, she walked on for a few
yards before she said bitterly,—

“O father, I’d have liked the Shetland pony _ever_ so much better;
couldn’t you change it yet? Is the sister much cheaper? I’ll give you my
shilling!”

She was rather hurt by the way her father laughed at this proposal.

“Why, Peggy, a sister will be ever so much nicer than a pony; she will
be able to play with you and speak to you soon.”

“Can’t she speak? She can’t be a very good one,” said Peggy dolefully.

“No, she can only cry as yet—she cries a good deal.”

“Well, I don’t want her then, father. Do please send her away, and get
me the pony instead, or even the cat.”

“I think we’ve got to keep her, Peggy. Suppose you wait till you see
her. Perhaps you won’t wish then to send her away.”

“Can she walk, if she is so stupid, and can’t talk?” Peggy asked
suspiciously.

“Oh no, she can’t walk; she is dressed in long robes, just like your
Belinda.”

“Who has been playing with her?” Peggy asked. “Has mother? It doesn’t
amuse her much to play with Belinda, and if this thing is just like her,
I wonder mother cares to play with it either.”

“Yes, mother has played with her most of the time.”

“Well, I think it’s very queer of her, for she doesn’t like Belinda a
bit,” said Peggy. Then, after a moment’s silence, she added, “Perhaps
I’ll like it too; I don’t _feel_ as if I would. And please, father, will
you let me ride up to the house on your back?”

This ended the discussion about the new sister.

And now, if I were to tell you how precious the new sister was to Peggy,
it would take another volume as big as this to tell it. For when Peggy’s
sister grew a little older, they had such wonderful adventures together
that Peggy used to wonder how she had got on all the tiresome years when
she was alone.

[Illustration: THE END]




                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES

    Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected. Where
    multiple spellings occur, majority use has been employed.

    Punctuation has been maintained except where obvious printer
    errors occur.

    Book name and author have been added to the original book cover.
    The resulting cover is placed in the public domain.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL THAT HAPPENED IN A WEEK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.