THE ADVENTURESS




                                BOOKS BY

                            ARTHUR B. REEVE

                   _Craig Kennedy Detective Stories_

                      THE ADVENTURESS
                      THE TREASURE-TRAIN
                      THE SILENT BULLET
                      THE POISONED PEN
                      THE DREAM DOCTOR
                      THE EXPLOITS OF ELAINE
                      THE ROMANCE OF ELAINE
                      THE EAR IN THE WALL
                      THE WAR TERROR
                      GOLD OF THE GODS
                      THE SOCIAL GANGSTER

                       _Other Detective Stories_

                      GUY GARRICK
                      CONSTANCE DUNLAP


                      HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK
                           [ESTABLISHED 1817]




[Illustration: CRAIG KENNEDY IN HIS LABORATORY]




                                  THE
                              ADVENTURESS

                    A CRAIG KENNEDY DETECTIVE STORY


                                   BY
                            ARTHUR B. REEVE

                               AUTHOR OF
                 _“The Treasure Train” and other Craig
                 Kennedy Scientific Detective Stories_


                            FRONTISPIECE BY
                              WILL FOSTER

                             [Illustration]


                      HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
                          NEW YORK AND LONDON




                            THE ADVENTURESS

                 Copyright, 1917, by Harper & Brothers
                Printed in the United States of America
                        Published November, 1917




                               CONTENTS


            CHAP.                                      PAGE

            I.     THE MYSTERY OF THE “SYBARITE”          1
            II.    THE SECRET SERVICE                    15
            III.   THE CABARET DANCER                    31
            IV.    THE BURGLAR’S MICROPHONE              44
            V.     THE WHITE LIGHT CAFÉ                  55
            VI.    THE POISON GAS                        69
            VII.   THE DIVORCE DETECTIVE                 80
            VIII.  THE PULMOTOR                          97
            IX.    THE TRAILING OF PAQUITA              109
            X.     THE DETECTAPHONE DETECTOR            124
            XI.    THE FRAME-UP                         135
            XII.   THE EAVESDROPPERS                    149
            XIII.  THE SERPENT’S TOOTH                  160
            XIV.   THE GEOPHONE                         171
            XV.    THE NIGHT OF TERROR                  183
            XVI.   THE INVISIBLE INK                    196
            XVII.  THE CIPHER LETTER                    211
            XVIII. THE RADIO DETECTIVE                  226
            XIX.   THE WIRELESS WIRETAPPER              242
            XX.    THE SPEED DEMON                      256
            XXI.   THE SUBMARINE EAR                    270
            XXII.  THE TELAUTOMATON                     285
            XXIII. THE CURB MARKET                      300
            XXIV.  THE PHANTOM CIRCUIT                  315
            XXV.   THE ADVENTURESS                      329




                            THE ADVENTURESS




                            THE ADVENTURESS


                                   I

                     THE MYSTERY OF THE “SYBARITE”


A revolver-shot followed by the crash of glass sounded in our hall.

At the same instant the laboratory door burst open and an elderly,
distinguished-looking man stumbled in on us, his hat now off, his
coat and collar awry, his hair rumpled, and his face wearing a dazed,
uncertain expression, as though he did not yet comprehend what had so
suddenly taken place.

“My God!” he exclaimed, gazing about in a vain effort to restore his
dignity and equilibrium. “What was that? I hardly had my hand on the
knob when it happened.”

A glance was enough to assure Kennedy that the man was unhurt, except
for the shock, and in a moment he dashed out into the hall.

The front door of the Chemistry Building had been shattered by a
revolver-shot. But not even the trace of a skulking figure could be
seen on the campus. Pursuit was useless. There was, apparently, no one
to pursue.

Pale and agitated still, the man sank limply into a chair as I forced a
stimulant into his trembling lips.

Kennedy closed the door and stood there a moment, a look of inquiry on
his face, but without a word.

“Some one――must have――shadowed me――all the way,” gasped the man as he
gulped hard, “must have seen me come in――tried to shoot me before I had
a chance to tell you my story.”

It was some minutes before our strange visitor regained his poise,
and Craig refrained from questioning him, though I was consumed with
curiosity to know the reason of his sudden entrance.

When at last he did speak, his first words were so different from
anything I had expected that I could hardly believe him to be the same
person. In spite of his nervousness, his tone was that of a hard,
practical man of business.

“I suppose you know something of Maddox Munitions, Incorporated?” he
inquired, somewhat brusquely.

I did not quite understand a man who could be himself so soon after an
episode such as he had been through, nor do I think Kennedy did, either.

“I have no interest in ‘war brides,’” returned Craig, coldly.

“Nor have I――as such,” the man agreed, apparently rather pleased than
otherwise at the stand-off attitude Kennedy had assumed. “But I happen
to be Maxwell Hastings, attorney for Marshall Maddox, who was――”

Kennedy wheeled about suddenly, interrupting. “Whose body was found
floating in Westport Bay this morning. Yes, Mr. Jameson and I have read
the little five-line despatch in the papers this morning. I thought
there was something back of it.”

As for me, I was even more excited now than Kennedy and I could see
a smile of satisfaction flit over the face of Hastings. In a few
sentences the clever lawyer had extracted from us what others took all
manner of time and art to discover. He knew that we were interested,
that he could depend on Kennedy’s taking the case.

Kennedy and I exchanged a significant glance. We had discussed the
thing cursorily at the breakfast-table as we did any odd bit of news
that interested us.

Already I knew, or fancied I knew, something of the affair. For it
was at the time when explosions in munitions plants had furnished many
thrilling chapters of news.

All the explosions had not been confined to the plants, however. There
had been and still were going on explosions less sanguinary but quite
as interesting in the Maddox family itself.

There was a hundred million dollars as the apple of discord, and a most
deadly feud had divided the heirs. Together they had made money so fast
that one might think they would not feel even annoyance over a stray
million here and there. But, as so often happens, jealousy had crept
in. Sudden wealth seemed to have turned the heads of the whole family.
Marshall Maddox was reported to have been making efforts to oust the
others and make himself master of the big concern.

“Maddox had had some trouble with his wife, hadn’t he?” I asked,
recalling scattered paragraphs lately in the papers.

Hastings nodded. “They were separated. That, too, was part of the
family disagreement. His sister, Frances, took the part of his wife,
Irene, I believe.”

Hastings considered a moment, as though debating how far he should go
in exposing the private affairs of his client, then caught the eye of
Kennedy, and seemed to realize that as long as he had called Craig into
the case he must be frank, at least with us.

“At the Westport Harbor House,” he added, deliberately, “we know that
there was a little Mexican dancer, Paquita. Perhaps you have heard of
her on the stage and in the cabarets of New York. Marshall Maddox knew
her in the city.”

He paused. Evidently he had something more to say and was considering
the best way to say it.

Finally Hastings leaned over and whispered, “We know, too, that Shelby
Maddox, his brother, had met Paquita at the Harbor House just before
the family conference which brought them all together.”

It was evident that, at least to Hastings, there was something in the
affair that looked ugly to him as far as Shelby was concerned.

“It’s not at all strange,” he added, “that two men as unlike as
Marshall and Shelby should disagree. Marshall was the dominating type,
eager for power; Shelby easy-going, more interested in having a good
time. In this affair of Paquita――whatever it amounted to――I’m not at
all surprised at Shelby. He is younger than Marshall was――and inclined
to be a sport. Still, there was a vein of susceptibility in Marshall,
too. There must have been.”

Hastings paused. Human frailties were out of his ken as a lawyer.
Property he understood; passions, no. With him the law had been a
jealous mistress and had brooked no rival.

“It was on Shelby’s yacht, the _Sybarite_, was it not, that the tragedy
occurred?” ventured Kennedy.

It was a leading question and Hastings knew it. He drew in a long,
contemplative breath as he decided whether he should consent to be led.

“Yes――and no,” he answered, finally. “They were there on the yacht, of
course, to agree to disagree and to divide the family fortune. Shelby
Maddox went to Westport on the yacht, and it was so hot at the Harbor
House that they decided to hold the conference on the _Sybarite_.
Marshall Maddox and I had motored out from town. The sister, Frances,
and her husband, Johnson Walcott, live on the other side of the island.
They motored over, also bringing with them Johnson Walcott’s sister,
Winifred, who stayed at the Harbor House. Johnson Walcott himself went
ashore from the yacht early in the evening, having to go to the city
on business. That was all right, for there was Bruce, the lawyer who
represented Frances Maddox――I mean Mrs. Walcott, of course. You see,
I’ve known the family so long that I often forget that she is married.
Shelby had his lawyer, also, Mr. Harvey. That was the party. As for the
tragedy, I can’t say that we know positively that it took place on the
yacht. No. We don’t _know_ anything.”

“Don’t know anything?” hastened Kennedy. “How’s that? Wasn’t the
conference amicable?”

“Well,” temporized Hastings, “I can’t say that it was especially. The
division was made. Marshall won control of the company――or at least
would have done so if the terms agreed on had been signed in the
morning. He agreed to form a syndicate to buy the others out, and the
price at which the stock was to be sold was fixed.”

“But did they dispute about anything?” persisted Kennedy, seeing how
the lawyer had evaded his question.

Hastings seemed rather to appreciate the insistence than to be annoyed
by it. So far, I could see that the great corporation lawyer was taking
Kennedy’s measure quite as much as Craig was doing the same by him.

“Yes,” he answered, “there was one thing that occasioned more dispute
than anything else. Maddox Munitions have purchased a wonderful new war
invention, the telautomaton――wireless control of submarines, torpedoes,
ships, vehicles, aeroplanes, everything,――the last word in the new
science of telautomatics.”

An exclamation of surprise escaped Kennedy. Often he and I had
discussed the subject and he had even done some work on it.

“Of course,” resumed Hastings, “we have had to acquire certain rights
and the basic, pioneer patents are not ours. But the manner in which
this telautomaton has been perfected over everything yet devised by
inventors renders it the most valuable single piece of property we
have. At last we have an efficient electric arm that we can stretch out
through space to do our work and fight our battles. Our system will
revolutionize industry as well as warfare.”

It was not difficult to catch the enthusiasm which Hastings showed over
the telautomaton. There was something fascinating about the very idea.

Kennedy, however, shook his head gravely. “Too big a secret to be in
the hands of a corporation,” he objected. “In warfare it should only
be possessed by the Government, and in industry it is――well, it is a
public service in itself. So that went to Marshall Maddox also?”

Hastings nodded.

“There will be trouble over that,” warned Kennedy. “Mark my words.
It is too big a secret.” For a moment he pondered, then changed the
subject. “What happened after the conference?”

“It was so late when we finished,” continued Hastings, “and there
were still some minor details to be cleared up in the morning. We all
decided to stay on the yacht rather than go ashore to the Harbor House.
The _Sybarite_ is a large yacht, and we each had a cabin, so that we
all turned in. There wasn’t much sociability in a crowd like that to
keep them up later than was necessary.”

“Yes,” prompted Kennedy as Hastings paused. “Marshall Maddox seemed all
right when he retired?”

“Perfectly. I went into his cabin and we chatted a few moments before
I went to mine, planning some steps we would take in the morning to
clear things up, especially to release all claims on the telautomaton.
I remember that Maddox seemed in very good spirits over the way things
had been going, though very tired. To my mind, that removes the
possibility of its having been suicide.”

“Nothing is impossible until it is proved so,” corrected Kennedy. “Go
on. Tell me how it was discovered.”

“I slept later than usual,” replied Hastings, seeking to get everything
in order. “The first thing I heard was Shelby’s Jap, Mito, rapping on
all the doors to make sure that we were awake. We had agreed to that.
Well, we gathered on the deck, all except Mr. Maddox. We waited, no one
thinking much about it except myself. I can’t say why it was, but I
felt uneasy. Mr. Maddox had always been so punctual and I had known him
so long. It was not like him to be the last on an occasion like this.

“Finally some one, I think it was Shelby, suggested that inasmuch as
I was in a sense his representative, I might go and hurry him up. I
was only too glad to go. I walked forward to the cabin he occupied and
rapped on the door. No answer. I tried the handle. To my surprise it
turned and I pushed the door open.”

“Don’t stop,” urged Kennedy, eagerly. “What did you see?”

“Nothing,” replied Hastings. “There was nothing there. The bed had been
slept in. But Mr. Maddox was gone!”

“How about his clothes?”

“Just as he had left them.”

“What did you do next?”

“I shouted an alarm and they all came running to me. Shelby called the
crew, Mito, the steward, every one. We questioned them all. No one had
seen or heard anything out of the way.”

“At least that’s what everybody said,” observed Craig. “What then?”

“No one knew what to do. Just about that time, however, we heard a
horn on a small boat tooting shrilly, as though for help. It was an
oysterman on his way to the oyster beds. His kicker had stopped and he
was signaling, apparently for help. I don’t know why it was, but Mrs.
Walcott must have thought something was wrong. Even before one of the
crew could find out what was the matter she picked up a marine glass
lying on a wicker chair.

“‘It――it’s a body!’ she cried, dropping the glasses to the deck.

“That was enough for us. Like a flash it went through my mind that it
could be no other than Mr. Maddox.”

“What did you do then?”

“The most natural thing. We did not wait for the oysterman to come to
us. We piled into one of Shelby’s tenders and went to him. Sure enough,
the oysterman had found the body, floating in the bay.”

There was a trace of a tear in Hastings’s eye, and his voice faltered
a bit. I rather liked him better for it. Except for fear at the
revolver-shot, I had almost begun to think him devoid of feeling.

“So far as we could see,” he resumed, as though ashamed to show
weakness even over one whom he had known so long, “there was nothing
to show whether he might not have got up, fallen overboard in some
way, and have been drowned, or might have been the victim of foul
play――except one thing.”

“What was that?” inquired Kennedy, eagerly.

“Maddox and I had taken out with us, in a brief-case which he carried,
the plans of the telautomaton. The model is in the company’s safe here
in New York. This morning when we went back to Maddox’s room I found
that the brief-case was missing. The plans are gone! You were right.
There has been trouble over them.”

Kennedy eyed Hastings keenly. “You found nothing in the room that would
give a hint?”

“I didn’t look,” returned Hastings. “I sealed the door and window――or
port-hole――whatever you call it――had them locked and placed a wax seal
bearing the impression of my ring, so that if it is broken, I will know
by whom. Everything there is just as it was. I wanted it that way, for
I had heard of you, and determined to come to town myself and get you.”

“The body?”

“I had the oysterman take it to an undertaking establishment in the
town so that we would have witnesses of everything that happened after
its discovery.”

“Did any of them suggest a theory?” asked Kennedy, after a moment’s
thought. “Or say anything?”

Hastings nodded negatively. “I think we were all too busy watching one
another to talk,” he ventured. “I was the only one who acted, and they
let me go ahead. Perhaps none of them dared stop me.”

“You don’t mean that there was a conspiracy?” I put in.

“Oh no,” smiled Hastings, indulgently. “They could never have agreed
long enough, even against Marshall Maddox, to conspire. No, indeed. I
mean that if one had objected, he would immediately have laid himself
open to suspicion from the rest. We all went ashore together. And now I
must get back to Westport immediately. I’m not even going to take time
to go down to the office. Kennedy, will you come?”

“An unnecessary question,” returned Craig, rising. “A mystery like this
is the breath of my life. You could scarcely keep me away.”

“Thank you,” said Hastings. “You won’t regret it, financially or
otherwise.”

We went out into the hall, and Kennedy started to lock the laboratory
door, when Hastings drew back.

“You’ll pardon me?” he explained. “The shot was fired at me out here.
I naturally can’t forget it.”

With Kennedy on one side and myself on the other, all three of us on
the alert, we hurried out and into a taxicab to go down to the station.

As we jolted along Kennedy plied the lawyer with a rapid fire of
questions. Even he could furnish no clue as to who had fired the shot
at him or why.




                                   II

                           THE SECRET SERVICE


Half an hour later we were on our way by train to Westport with
Hastings. As the train whisked us along Craig leaned back in his chair
and surveyed the glimpses of water and countryside through the window.
Now and then, as we got farther out from the city, through a break in
the trees one could catch glimpses of the deep-blue salt water of bay
and Sound, and the dazzling whiteness of sand.

Now and then Kennedy would break in with a question to Hastings,
showing that his mind was actively at work on the case, but by his
manner I could see that he was eager to get on the spot before all that
he considered important had been messed up by others.

Hastings hurried us directly from the train to the little undertaking
establishment to which the body of Marshall Maddox had been taken.

A crowd of the curious had already gathered, and we pushed our way in
through them.

There lay the body. It had a peculiar, bloated appearance and the face
was cyanosed and blue. Maddox had been a large man and well set up. In
death he was still a striking figure. What was the secret behind those
saturnine features?

“Not a scratch or a bruise on him, except those made in handling the
body,” remarked the coroner, who was also a doctor, as he greeted
Kennedy.

Craig nodded, then began his own long and careful investigation. He
was so busily engaged, and I knew that it was so important to keep him
from being interrupted, that I placed myself between him and those who
crowded into the little room back of the shop.

But before I knew it a heavily veiled woman had brushed past me and
stood before the body.

“Irene Maddox!” I heard Hastings whisper in Kennedy’s ear as Craig
straightened up in surprise.

As she stood there there could be no doubt that Irene Maddox had been
very bitter toward her husband. The wound to her pride had been deep.
But the tragedy had softened her. She stood tearless, however, before
the body, and as well as I could do so through her veil I studied her
face. What did his death mean to her, aside from the dower rights that
came to her in his fortune? It was impossible to say.

She stood there several minutes, then turned and walked deliberately
out through the crowd, looking neither to the right nor to the left.
I found myself wondering at the action. Yet why should she have
shown more emotion? He had been nothing to her but a name――a hateful
name――for years.

My speculation was cut short by the peculiar action of a dark-skinned,
Latin-American-looking man whose face I had not noticed in the crowd
before the arrival of Mrs. Maddox. As she left he followed her out.

Curious, I turned and went out also. I reached the street door just in
time to see Irene Maddox climb into a car with two other people.

“Who are they?” I asked a boy standing by the door.

“Mr. and Mrs. Walcott,” he replied.

Even in death the family feud persisted. The Walcotts had not even
entered.

“Did you know that the Walcotts brought Mrs. Maddox here?” I asked
Hastings as I returned to Kennedy.

“No, but I’m not surprised,” he returned. “You remember I told you
Frances took Irene’s part. Walcott must have returned from the city as
soon as he heard of the tragedy.”

“Who was that sallow-faced individual who followed her out?” I asked.
“Did you notice him?”

“Yes, I saw him, but I don’t know who he can be,” replied Hastings. “I
don’t think I ever saw him before.”

“That Latin-American?” interposed Kennedy, who had completed his first
investigation and made arrangements to co-operate with the coroner in
carrying on the autopsy in his own laboratory. “I was wondering myself
whether he could have any connection with Paquita. Where is she now?”

“At the Harbor House, I suppose,” answered Hastings――“that is, if she
is in town.”

Kennedy hurried out of the establishment ahead of us and we looked down
the street in time to see our man headed in the direction the Walcott
automobile had taken.

He had too good a start of us, however, and before we could overtake
him he had reached the Harbor House and entered. We had gained
considerably on him, but not enough to find out where he went in the
big hotel.

The Harbor House was a most attractive, fashionable hostelry, a
favorite run for motor parties out from the city. On the water-front
stood a large, red-roofed, stucco building known as the Casino,
entirely given over to amusements. Its wide porch of red tiles,
contrasting with the innumerable white tables on it, looked out over
the sheltered mouth of Westport Bay and on into the Sound, where,
faintly outlined on the horizon, one saw the Connecticut shore.

Back of the Casino, and on a hill so that it looked directly over the
roof of the lower building, was the hotel itself, commonly known as
the Lodge, a new, up-to-date, shingle-sheathed building with every
convenience that money and an expensive architect could provide. The
place was ideal for summer sports――golf, tennis, motoring, bathing,
boating, practically everything one could wish.

As we walked through the Lodge we could almost feel in the air the
excited gossip that the death of Maddox had created in the little
summer colony at Westport.

Vainly seeking our dark-skinned man, we crossed to the Casino. As we
approached the porch Hastings took Kennedy’s arm.

“There are Shelby Maddox and Winifred Walcott,” he whispered.

“I should like to meet them,” said Kennedy, glancing at the couple whom
Hastings had indicated at the far end of the porch.

Following the lawyer, we approached them.

Shelby Maddox was a tall young chap, rather good-looking, inclined to
the athletic, and with that deferential, interested manner which women
find almost irresistible.

As we approached he was talking earnestly, oblivious to everything
else. I could not blame him. Winifred was a slender, vivacious girl,
whose gray-blue eyes caught and held yours even while you admired her
well-rounded cheeks, innocent of make-up. Her high forehead denoted an
intellect which the feminine masses of puffy light-brown hair made all
the more charming. One felt her personality in every action. She was
not afraid of sun and air. A pile of the more serious magazines near
her indicated that she was quite as much alive to the great movements
that are stirring the world to-day as she was to the outdoor life that
glowed in her face. It was easy to see that Shelby Maddox was having a
new experience.

“Good morning,” greeted Hastings.

Winifred smiled, but Shelby was plainly annoyed at the intrusion of the
lawyer. I could not make out whether there was an aversion to Hastings
behind the annoyance or not.

The introductions over, we sat down for a moment. Hastings had been
careful not to say that Kennedy was a detective, but to hint that he
was a friend and, by implication, a lawyer.

“It must have been a severe shock when you heard what had happened,” he
began, speaking to Winifred.

“It was indeed,” she replied, gravely. “You see, I stayed here at the
Harbor House while my brother and sister-in-law were on the yacht.
Johnson came off early because he had to go to the city, and telephoned
up to the room that they were going to be late and Frances would stay
out on the yacht. Then when I came down this morning they were just
bringing the body ashore.”

She shuddered at the recollection and Shelby flashed a look at Kennedy
as though he could knife him for bringing up the distasteful subject.
It seemed as though Shelby Maddox was pretty unconcerned about his
brother’s death.

“Strange that you heard nothing on the yacht,” switched Kennedy,
looking full at Shelby.

“We didn’t,” returned the young man, but in a tone that showed his
attention was somewhere else.

I followed the direction of his eyes.

A petite, frilly, voluptuous figure stood in the doorway. She had
an almost orchid beauty that more than suggested the parasite. Of a
type quite the opposite of Winifred, she had nevertheless something
interesting about her. For the born adventuress is always a baffling
study.

Even before Hastings whispered I knew it must be Paquita.

She passed across the porch toward a flight of steps that led down to
the shore, and as she did so nodded to Shelby with a smile, at the same
time casting a look at Winifred such as only one woman can when she is
taking in another at a glance. Winifred was first of all a woman. Her
face flushed almost imperceptibly, but her own glance of estimation
never faltered. I felt that there was a silent clash. Winifred was the
antithesis of Paquita.

Shelby failed even with his cigarette to cover up his confusion. But
as I searched his face I thought I saw one thing at least. Whatever
might or might not have been the truth in Hastings’s story of Shelby’s
acquaintance with Paquita once, it was evident now that Winifred
Walcott quite filled his eye.

As she paused before going down the steps Paquita darted back one more
look at Shelby. Had he once felt the lure? At least now he made no
move. And Paquita was insanely jealous.

“I should like to have Mr. Kennedy look over the _Sybarite_, especially
the room which I sealed,” suggested Hastings in a tone which was not
peremptory, but nevertheless was final.

Shelby looked from Hastings to Winifred. The passing of Paquita
seemed to have thrown a cloud over the sunshine which had brightened
the moments before. He was torn between two emotions. There was no
denying the request of Hastings. Yet this was no time to leave Winifred
suspicious.

“I think you had better go,” she said, finally, as Shelby hesitated.

“Would you not be one of the party?” he asked, eagerly.

“I don’t think I could stand it,” she replied, hastily.

It was perfectly natural. Yet I could see that it left Shelby uncertain
of her real reason.

Reluctantly he said good-by and we four made our way down the dock
to the float where was moored a fast tender of the yacht. We climbed
aboard, and the man in charge started the humming, many-cylindered
engine. We darted off in a cloud of spray.

Once I saw Kennedy looking back, and I looked back also. In the far
corner of the Casino stood the sallow-faced man, watching us intently.
Who and what could he be?

Westport Bay is one of those fjords, as they almost might be called,
which run in among the beautifully wooded hills of the north shore of
Long Island.

The _Sybarite_ was lying at anchor a mile or so offshore. As we
approached her we saw that she was a 150-foot, long, low-lying craft
of the new type, fitted with gas-engines, and built quite as much for
comfort as for speed. She was an elaborately built craft, with all the
latest conveniences, having a main saloon, dining-room, library, and
many state-rooms, all artistically decorated. In fact, it must have
cost a small fortune merely to run the yacht.

As we boarded it Shelby led the way to the sheltered deck aft, and we
sat down for a moment to become acquainted.

“Mito,” he called to a Japanese servant, “take the gentlemen’s hats.
And bring us cigars.”

The servant obeyed silently. Evidently Shelby spared nothing that made
for comfort.

“First of all,” began Craig, “I want to see the state-room where
Marshall Maddox slept.”

Shelby arose, apparently willingly enough, and led the way to the lower
berth deck. Hastings carefully examined the seal which he had left on
the door and, finding it intact, broke it and unlocked the door for us.

It was a bedroom rather than a state-room. The walls were paneled in
wood and the port-hole was finished inside to look like a window. It
was toward this port-hole that Kennedy first directed his attention,
opening it and peering out at the water below.

“Quite large enough for a man to get through――or throw a body through,”
he commented, turning to me.

I looked out also. “It’s a long way to the water,” I remarked, thinking
perhaps he meant that a boat might have nosed up alongside and some one
have entered that way.

“Still, if one had a good-sized cruiser, one might reach it by standing
on the roof of the cabin,” he observed. “At any rate, there’d be
difficulty in disposing of a body that way.”

He turned. The wind had swung the yacht around so that the sun streamed
in through the open port. Kennedy bent down and picked up some little
bright slivers of thin metal that lay scattered here and there on the
carpet.

He looked about at the furniture, then bent down and examined the side
of the bedstead. It seemed to be pitted with little marks. He rose,
and as he did so his gaze fell on one of the brass fittings of the
cabin. It seemed to have turned green, almost to be corroded. With his
penknife he scraped off some of the corrosion and placed it on a piece
of paper, which he folded up.

The examination of the state-room completed, Shelby took us about the
boat. First of all, he showed us the handsomely furnished main saloon
opening into a little library, almost as if it were an apartment.

“It was here,” he volunteered, “that we held the conference last night.”

For the first time I became aware, although Kennedy had noticed it
before, that when we boarded the _Sybarite_ Mito had been about. He had
passed twice down the hall while we were in the state-room occupied by
Marshall Maddox. He was now busy in the library, but on our entrance
had withdrawn deferentially, as though not wishing to intrude.

Henceforth I watched the Japanese keenly as he padded about the boat.
Everywhere we went I fancied that he turned up. He seemed ubiquitous.
Was it that he was solicitous of the wants of his master? Had he
received instructions from him? Did the slant-eyed Oriental have
something hidden behind that inscrutable face of his?

There did not seem to be anything else that we could discover aboard
the yacht. Though we interviewed the officer and those of the crew
who had been on watch, we were unable to find out from them that
anything unusual had been observed, either as far as any other boat was
concerned or on the _Sybarite_ itself. In spite of them, the affair
was as completely shrouded in mystery as ever.

Having looked the yacht over, Kennedy seemed now to be eager to get
ashore again.

“I hope you are satisfied, gentlemen?” asked Shelby at last as our tour
brought us to the mahogany steps that led from the outside of the white
hull to the tender which had brought us out.

“Very well――so far,” returned Kennedy.

Maddox looked up quickly, but did not ask what he meant. “If there is
any way in which I can be of service to you,” he continued, “you have
only to command me. I have as much reason as any one to clear up the
mystery in this unfortunate affair. I believe I will go ashore with
you.”

He did not need to say that he was eager to get back to see Winifred
Walcott, any more than Kennedy needed to tell me that he would like to
see our sallow-faced friend again.

The tender skimmed over the waves, throwing the spray gaily as we sped
back to the Harbor House dock.

We landed and Maddox excused himself, repeating his desire to aid us.
Down the beach toward the bath-houses I could make out the frilly
Paquita, surrounded now by several of the bathers, all men. Maddox saw
her, but paid no attention. He was headed for the veranda of the Lodge.

The day was growing older and the Casino was beginning to liven up. In
the exquisitely appointed ballroom, which was used also for morning and
afternoon dances, strains of the one-step attracted some dozen couples.
Kennedy sauntered along, searching the faces we passed in the hope of
seeing some one who might be of value to know on the case, now and then
reminding Hastings not to neglect to point out any one who might lend
aid. Hastings saw no one, however, and as we mounted the steps to the
Lodge excused himself for a minute to send some telegrams to those of
the family whom he had forgotten.

We had promised to meet him in the lobby by the desk, and thither
Kennedy bent his steps.

“I think I’ll look over the register,” he remarked, as we approached
the busiest part of the hotel. “Perhaps, too, some of the clerks may
know something.”

There was nothing on the register, apparently, for after turning it
around and running through it he merely laid his finger on the name
“Señorita Paquita Gonzales, Maid and Chauffeur, New York,” written
under the date of the day before the arrival of the Maddoxes for the
conference, and among the last of the day, showing that she had arrived
late.

As we were looking over the names we were startled by a voice softly
speaking behind us.

“Well, I should have known you fellows would be out here before
long. It’s a big case. Don’t notice me here. I’ll see you in the
writing-room. It’s empty now.”

We turned in surprise. It was our old friend Burke, of the Secret
Service.

He had already lounged off, and we followed without seeming to do so,
stopping only for a moment at the news-stand.

“Why are you here?” demanded Craig, pointedly, as we three settled
ourselves in an angle of the deserted writing-room.

“For the same reason that you are,” Burke returned, with a smile; then
added, gravely, “I can trust you, Kennedy.”

Craig was evidently much impressed by the low tone and the manner of
the detective, but said nothing.

“They tell me Hastings was in town this morning, at your laboratory,”
went on Burke. “Too bad he didn’t take the time to call up his office.
But he knows something now――that is, if he has that note I left for
him.”

“Why, what is that?” chorused both Craig and I.

Just then Hastings himself almost ran into the room as if his life
depended on finding us.

As he saw us he darted over to our corner.

“You are Mr. Burke, of the Secret Service?” he queried as Burke nodded.
“Kennedy, the safe in the office of Maddox Munitions in New York was
robbed late last night or early this morning, and the model of the
telautomaton is stolen!”




                                  III

                           THE CABARET DANCER

We could only stare from Burke to Hastings, startled at the magnitude
of the affair as it developed so rapidly.

For a moment Hastings was at a loss, then darted quickly into a
telephone-booth to call up his office on long distance for confirmation
of the news.

As we waited I happened to glance out into the lobby. At the far end,
in an angle, to my surprise I saw Shelby and Paquita. Evidently she had
hovered about, waiting for a chance to find him alone, and had at last
succeeded.

Already Kennedy and Burke had seen them.

Paquita was talking earnestly. Of course, we could not overhear what
was said, and they were so placed that even if we moved closer to them
they would be likely to see us. Still, from our corner we could observe
without being observed.

It seemed as if Paquita were making a desperate effort to attract
Shelby, while, on his part, it was quite evident that he was
endeavoring to get away.

Paquita was indeed a fascinating figure. From what I had already
observed, a score of the young fellows about the Harbor House would
have given their eyes to have been in Shelby’s place. Why was he
seeking so to avoid her? Was it that he did not dare to trust himself
with the little dancer? Or was there some hold that she had over him
which he feared?

The interview had not proceeded long when Shelby deliberately seemed to
excuse himself and walked away. Paquita looked after him as he hurried
off, and I would have given much to have been close enough to observe
her expression. Was it one of fury, of a woman scorned? At any rate, I
would have wagered that it boded no good for Shelby.

I turned to say something to Kennedy and found that he was looking
in another direction. We were not the only observers. From a window
outside on the porch the sallow-faced man was also watching. As
Shelby walked away the man seemed to be very angry. Was it the anger
of jealousy because Paquita was with Shelby or was it anger because
Shelby had repulsed her advances? Who was the fellow and why was he so
interested in the little dancer and the young millionaire?

Hastings rejoined us from the telephone-booth, his face almost pale.

“It’s a fact,” he groaned. “They have been trying to reach me all day,
but could not. The secret of the telautomaton stolen――the secret that
is too terrible to be in the hands of any one except the Government.
How did you hear of it?” he asked Burke.

Burke answered slowly, watching the expression on Hastings’s face.
“When the cashier of the company arrived at the office this morning he
found the safe had been rifled. It seems an almost incomprehensible
thing――as you will understand when you see it for yourself. The cashier
telephoned at once to the Secret Service in the Custom-House, and
I jumped out on the case. You did not go to your own office. I did
a little hasty deduction――guessed that you might have gone to see
Kennedy. At any rate, I wanted to see him myself.”

Kennedy interrupted long enough to tell about the revolver-shot and the
attack on Hastings at our very door.

“Whew!” exclaimed Burke, “just missed you. Well,” he added, with a dry
sort of humor, “I missed you, too, and decided to come out here on
the train. Kennedy, you must go back to town with me and look at that
safe. How anybody could get into it is a mystery beyond me. But the
telautomaton is gone. My orders are simple――get it back!”

For a moment neither Kennedy nor Hastings spoke. It was most
peculiar――the plans gone in Westport, the model gone in New York.

“Who could have stolen the model?” I asked, finally. “Have you any
theory, Burke?”

“A theory, yes,” he replied, slowly, “but no facts to back it. I
suppose you know that the war has driven out some of the most clever
and astute crooks that Paris, Vienna, London, and other capitals
ever produced. The fact is that we are at present in the hands of
the largest collection of high-grade foreign criminals that has ever
visited this country. I think it is safe to say that at present there
are more foreign criminals of high degree in New York and at the
fashionable summer resorts than could be found in all the capitals of
Europe combined. They have evaded military service because at heart
they are cowards and hate work. War is hard work. Then, there is little
chance of plying their trade, for their life is the gay life of the
cafés and boulevards. Besides, America is the only part of the world
where prosperity is reigning. So they are here, preying on American
wealth. Suppose some one――some foreign agent――wanted the telautomaton.
There are plenty of tools he could use for his purpose in obtaining it.”

The countenance of the sallow-faced man recurred to me. It was an
alarming possibility that Burke’s speculation raised. Were we really
not involved in a pure murder case, but in the intricacies of the
machinations of some unknown power?

Burke looked at his watch, then again at Kennedy. “Really, I think you
ought to go back to town,” he reiterated, “and take the case up there.”

“And leave these people all here to do as they please, cover up what
they will?” objected Hastings, who had tried to prevent just that sort
of thing by bringing Kennedy out post-haste.

“My men are perfectly competent to watch anything that goes on at
Westport,” returned Burke. “I have them posted all about and I’m
digging up some good stuff. Already I know just what happened the
night before the conference. That cabaret dancer, Paquita, motored out
here and arrived about the time the _Sybarite_ cast anchor. She met
Shelby Maddox at the Casino and they had a gay supper party. But it
ended early. She knew that Marshall Maddox was coming the next day. I
know he had known her in the city. As to Shelby we don’t know yet. The
meeting may have been chance or it may have been prearranged.”

I recalled not only the little incident we had just seen, but the
glance of jealousy Paquita had given Shelby when she saw him with
Winifred. What did it mean? Had Shelby Maddox been using Paquita
against his brother, and now was he trying to cast her off? Or
was Burke’s theory correct? Was she a member of a clever band of
super-criminals, playing one brother against the other for some
ulterior end? Was the jealousy feigned or was it real, after all?

“What I am endeavoring to do now,” went on Burke, “is to trace the
doings of Paquita the night of the murder. I cannot find out whether
she came out at the invitation of Marshall Maddox or not. Perhaps it
was Shelby. I don’t know. If it was Marshall, what about his former
wife? Did he suppose that she would not be here? Or didn’t he care?”

“Perhaps――blackmail,” suggested Hastings, who, as a lawyer, had had
more or less to do with such attempts.

Burke shook his head. “It might have been, of course, but in that case
don’t you think you, as Maddox’s lawyer, would have heard something of
it? You have not――have you? You don’t know anything about her?”

Burke regarded the lawyer keenly, as though he might be concealing
something. But Hastings merely shook his head.

“Mr. Maddox did not confide his weaknesses to me,” Hastings remarked,
coldly.

“If we are going back to the city,” returned Burke, cheerfully changing
the subject, to the evident surprise of Hastings, “I must find my
operative, Riley, and let him know what to do while we are gone.”

“Look,” muttered Kennedy under his breath to us and nodding down the
lobby.

Shelby Maddox had sought and found Winifred, and was chatting as
animatedly as if there had been no Paquita in the world less than five
minutes before.

As we watched, Hastings remarked: “It was only the day before the
murder that Shelby first met Winifred Walcott. I believe he had never
seen his brother-in-law’s sister before. She had been away in the West
ever since Frances Maddox married Walcott. Winifred seems to have made
a quick conquest.”

Remembering what had happened before, I took a quick look about to see
whether any one else was as interested as ourselves. Seeing no one,
Kennedy and I strolled down the corridor quietly.

We had not gone far before we stopped simultaneously. Nestled in the
protecting wings of a big wicker chair was Paquita, and as we watched
her she never took her eyes from the couple ahead.

What did this constant espionage of Shelby mean? For one thing, we must
place this little adventuress in the drama of the Maddox house of hate.
We moved back a bit where we could see them all.

A light footfall beside us caused us to turn suddenly. It was Mito,
padding along on some errand to his master. As he passed I saw that his
beady eyes had noted that we were watching Shelby. There was no use
to retreat now. We had been observed. Mito passed, bestowing a quick
sidewise glance on Paquita as he did so. A moment later he approached
Shelby deferentially and stood waiting a few feet away.

Shelby looked up and saw his valet, bowed an excuse to Winifred, and
strode over to where Mito was standing. The conversation was brief.
What it was about we had no means of determining, but of one thing we
were certain. Mito had not neglected a hasty word to his master that
he was watched. For, an instant later when Mito had been dismissed,
Shelby returned to Winifred and they walked deliberately out of the
hotel across a wide stretch of open lawn in the direction of the
tennis-courts. To follow him was a confession that we were watching.
Evidently, too, that had been Shelby’s purpose, for as he chatted he
turned half-way, now and then, to see if they were observed. Again Mito
padded by and I fancied I caught a subtle smile on his saturnine face.
If we were watching, we were ourselves no less watched.

There was nothing to be gained in this blind game of hide-and-seek,
and Kennedy was evidently not yet prepared to come out into the open.
Paquita, too, seemed to relinquish the espionage for the moment, for
she rose and walked slowly toward the Casino, where she was quickly
joined by some of her more ardent admirers.

I glanced at Kennedy.

“I think we had better go back to Burke and Hastings,” he decided.
“Burke is right. His men can do almost as much here as we could at
present. Besides, if we go away the mice may play. They will think we
have been caught napping. That telautomaton robbery is surely our next
big point of attack. Here it is first of all the mystery of Marshall
Maddox’s death, and I cannot do anything more until the coroner sends
me, as he has promised, the materials from the autopsy. Even then I
shall need to be in my laboratory if I am to discover anything.”

“Your sallow-faced friend seemed quite interested in you,” commented
Burke as we rejoined him.

“How’s that?” inquired Kennedy.

“From here I could see him, following every move you made,” explained
the Secret Service man.

Kennedy bit his lip. Not only had Mito seen us and conveyed a warning
to Shelby, but the dark-skinned man of mystery had been watching us
all. Evidently the situation was considerably mixed. Perhaps if we went
away it would really clear itself up and we might place these people
more accurately with reference to one another.

Burke looked at his watch hurriedly. “There’s a train that leaves in
twenty minutes,” he announced. “We can make the station in a car in
fifteen.”

Kennedy and I followed him to the door, while Hastings trailed along
reluctantly, not yet assured that it would be safe to leave Westport so
soon.

At the door a man stepped up deferentially to Burke, with a glance of
inquiry at us.

“It’s all right, Riley,” reassured Burke. “You can talk before them.
One of my best operatives, Riley, gentlemen. I shall leave this end in
your charge, Val.”

“All right, sir,” returned the Secret Service operative. “I was just
going to say, about that dark fellow we saw gum-shoeing it about. We’re
watching him. We picked him up on the beach during the bathing hour.
Do you know who he is? He’s the private detective whom Mrs. Maddox had
watching her husband and that Paquita woman. I don’t know what he’s
watching her yet for, sir, but,” Riley lowered his voice for emphasis,
“once one of the men saw him talking to Paquita. Between you and me, I
wouldn’t be surprised if he was trying to double-cross Mrs. Maddox.”

Hastings opened his eyes in wonder at the news. As for me, I began to
wonder if I had not been quite mistaken in my estimate of Irene Maddox.
Was she the victim, the cat’s-paw of some one?

Riley was not finished, however. “Another thing before you leave, Mr.
Burke,” he added. “The night watchman at the Harbor House tells me that
he saw that Japanese servant of Shelby Maddox last night, or, rather,
early this morning. He didn’t go down to the dock and the watchman
thought that perhaps he had been left ashore by mistake and couldn’t
get out on the _Sybarite_.”

“That’s impossible,” cut in Hastings, quickly. “He was on the yacht
last night when we went to bed and he woke me up this morning.”

“I know it,” nodded Riley. “You see, I figure that he might have come
off the yacht in a rowboat and landed down the shore on the beach. Then
he might have got back. But what for?”

The question was unanswered, but not, we felt, unanswerable.

“Very well, Riley,” approved Burke. “Keep right after anything that
turns up. And don’t let that Paquita out of sight of some of the men a
minute. Good-by. We’ve just time to catch the train.”

Hastings was still unreconciled to the idea of leaving town, in spite
of the urgency of the developments in New York.

“I think it’s all right,” reassured Kennedy. “You see, if I stayed I’d
have to call on an agency, anyhow. Besides, I got all I could and the
only thing left would be to watch them. Perhaps if I go away they may
do something they wouldn’t dare otherwise. In that case we have planted
a fine trap. You can depend on it that Burke’s men will do more for us,
now, than any private agency.”

Hastings agreed reluctantly, and as we hurried back to New York on the
train Kennedy quizzed Burke as he had Hastings on the journey out.

There was not much that Burke could add to what he had already told
us. The robbery of the safe in the Maddox office had been so cleverly
executed that I felt that it would rank along with the historic cases.
No ordinary yeggs or petermen had performed this operation, and as the
train neared the city we were all on edge to learn what possibly might
have been uncovered during the hours that we had been working on the
other end of the case out at Westport.




                                   IV

                        THE BURGLAR’S MICROPHONE


As we crossed the city Hastings, remembering the sudden attack that
had been made on him on the occasion of his last visit, looked about
nervously in the crowds.

Sometimes I wondered whether the lawyer had been frank with us and told
all he knew. However, no one seemed to be following him and we lost no
time in hustling from the railroad terminal to the office of Maddox
Munitions.

The office was on the top floor of the new Maddox Building, I knew, one
of the recent tower skyscrapers down-town.

As we turned into the building and were passing down the corridor to
the express elevator a man stepped out from behind a pillar. Hastings
drew back nervously. But it was Burke that the man wanted to see. He
dropped back and we halted, catching only the first whispered sentence.

“We’ve been watching Randall, sir,” I overheard the man say, “but he
hasn’t done anything――yet.”

There was a hasty conference between the man and Burke, who rejoined
us in a few seconds, while the man went back to his post of watching,
apparently, every face of the crowd that thronged forward to the
elevators or bustled away from them.

“My men have been at work ever since I was called in on the case,”
explained Burke to Kennedy. “You see, I had only time to map out a
first campaign for them, and then I decided to hurry off to find you
and later to look over the ground at Westport. Randall is the cashier.
I can’t say that I had anything on him――really――but then you never can
tell, you know.”

We rode up in the elevator and entered the imposing offices of the
great munitions corporation, where the executive business was conducted
for the score or more plants owned or controlled by the company in
various parts of the country.

Hastings led the way familiarly past the girl sitting at a desk in the
outside office and we soon found ourselves in the section that was set
apart for the accounting department, over which Randall had charge.

It seemed that the lawyer was well acquainted with the cashier as he
introduced him to us, and we noted that Randall was a man approaching
middle age, at least outwardly, with that solid appearance that seems
to come to men who deal with numbers and handle large sums of money.

While we talked I looked about curiously. Randall had an inner office,
though in the outer office stood the huge safe which was evidently the
one which had been rifled.

The cashier himself seemed to have lost, for the time, some of his
customary poise. Trying to make him out, I fancied that he was nearly
frantic with fear lest he might be suspected, not so much, perhaps, of
having had anything to do with the loss of the telautomaton as of being
remiss in his duties, which included the guardianship of the safe.

The very anxiety of the man seemed to be a pretty good guarantee of his
honesty. There could be no doubt of how deeply he felt the loss, not
only because it was of such vital importance, but from the mere fact
that it might reflect on his own management of his department.

“It seems almost incredible,” Randall exclaimed as we stood talking.
“The most careful search has failed to reveal any clue that would
show even how access to the office was gained. Not a lock on any of
the doors has been tampered with, not a scratch indicates the use of
a jimmy on them or on the windows. In fact, entrance by the windows
at such a height above the surrounding buildings is almost beyond the
range of possibility as well as probability. How could it have been
accomplished? I am forced to come back to the explanation that the
outer office doors had been opened by a key!”

“There were keys――in the hands of several people, I suppose?” inquired
Kennedy.

“Oh yes! There are in every large office like this,” hastened Randall.

“Mr. Maddox had a key, of course?”

“Yes.”

“And you?”

“Certainly.”

“Who else?”

“The agent of the building.”

“I mean who else in the office?”

“My assistant――oh, several. Still, I am sure that no one had a key
except those whom we could trust.”

“Did Shelby Maddox ever have a key?” cut in Hastings.

The cashier nodded in the negative, for the moment surprised,
apparently, at the very idea that Shelby would ever have had interest
enough in business to have such a thing.

I saw Burke looking in covert surprise at Hastings as he asked the
question. For the moment I wondered why he asked it. Had he really
thought that Shelby might have a key? Or was he trying hard to make a
case? What was his own connection with the affair? Kennedy had been
looking keenly about.

“Is that the safe over there?” he indicated. “I should like to examine
it.”

“Yes, that’s it, and that’s the strangest part of it,” hastened
Randall, as though eager to satisfy us on all points, leading the way
to a modern chrome-steel strong-box of a size almost to suggest a
miniature bank vault surely a most formidable thing to tackle.

“You see,” he went on, nervously, as though eager to convince us,
“there is not a mark on it to show that it has been tampered with.
Yet the telautomaton is gone. I know that it was there last night,
all right, for I looked in the compartment where we keep the little
model, as well as the papers relating to it. It is a small model, and
of course was not charged with explosive. But it is quite sufficient
for its purpose, and if its war-head were actually filled with a high
explosive it would be sufficiently deadly against any ordinary ship in
spite of its miniature size.”

Kennedy had already begun his examination, first of all assuring
himself that it was useless to try to look for finger-prints, inasmuch
as nearly everybody had touched the safe since the robbery and any such
clue, had it once existed, must have been rendered valueless.

“How did you discover the loss?” I ventured as Craig bent to his work.
“Did anything excite your suspicion?”

“N-no,” returned the cashier. “Only I have been very methodical about
the safe. The model was kept in that compartment at the bottom. I make
it a practice in opening and closing the safe to see that that and
several other valuable things we keep in it are there. This morning
nothing about the office and certainly nothing about the safe suggested
that there was anything wrong until I worked the combination. The door
swung open and I looked through it. I could scarcely believe my own
eyes when I saw that that model was gone. I couldn’t have been more
astonished if I had come in and found the door open. I am the only one
who knows the combination――except for a copy kept in a safety deposit
box known only to Marshall Maddox and Mr. Hastings.”

Before any of us could say a word Kennedy had completed his first
examination and was facing us. “I can’t find a mark on it,” he
confessed. “No ‘soup’ has been used to blow it. Nitroglycerin enough
might have wrecked the building. The old ‘can-opener’ is of course out
of the question with a safe like this. No instrument could possibly
rip a plate off this safe unless you gave the ripper unlimited time.
There’s not a hint that thermit or the oxy-acetylene blowpipe have been
used. Not a spot on the safe indicates the presence of anything that
can produce those high temperatures.”

“Yet the telautomaton is gone!” persisted Hastings.

Kennedy was looking about, making a quick search of the office.

As his eye traveled over the floor he took a step or two forward and
bent down. Under a sanitary desk, near a window, he picked up what
looked like a small piece of rubber tubing. He looked at it with
interest, though it conveyed no idea to me. It was simply a piece of
rubber tubing. Then he took another step to the window and raised it,
looking out. Far below, some hundred or more feet, was the roof of the
next building, itself no mean structure for height.

“Have you searched the roof below?” he asked, turning to Burke.

Burke shook his head. “How could any one get in that way?” he
negatived.

“Well――search the roof below,” repeated Kennedy.

Even though he did not understand what good might come of such a
strange request, Burke had known Kennedy long enough not to question
his actions. He moved away, seeking one of his men whom he could send
on the errand.

While we waited Kennedy continued to question Randall.

“Mr. Maddox was very careful of his key, I suppose?” he ventured.

“Yes, sir, very careful. So we all were of the combination, too. Not
even my assistant knows that. If I should drop dead, there would be
only one way to get it――to open that safety deposit box, and that
must be done by some one with the proper authority. It has all been
carefully safeguarded.”

“You know of no one intimate with Mr. Maddox――who might have obtained
the key――or the combination?”

I wondered at what Kennedy was driving. Had he the little dancer,
Paquita, in mind? Did he suspect that she might have wormed from Maddox
the secret? Or was he, too, thinking of Shelby?

Randall shook his head, and Kennedy continued his quick examination of
the office, questioning the assistant, who was unable to add anything
of value.

So far there had been nothing to show that the robbery might not have
been an inside job. As Kennedy was still pondering on the new mystery
that confronted us Burke approached with the man whom he had sent to
make the search.

His face indicated that he was puzzled. In his hand he was holding a
disk that was something like the flat telephone receivers one sees
often on interior office telephones. To it was attached a rubber tube
like that which Kennedy had picked up in the office a few minutes
before.

“My man found this thing on the roof below,” explained Burke, with a
look of inquiry. “What do you suppose it is? How did it get there?”

Kennedy took the disk and began examining it carefully, fitting on the
other rubber tube.

“Perhaps it had served its purpose――was no longer of use,” he
meditated. “At any rate, if some one had to get away with that
telautomaton he would not want to burden himself with anything else
that was unnecessary. He might very well have discarded this.”

What the thing was I could not imagine. We all crowded about, examining
it, not even Burke offering an explanation.

Suddenly Craig’s face lightened up. He thrust the tubes into his ears
and walked over to a smaller safe that was still locked. As he turned
the combination handle he held the black disk up close to the safe. The
intent look on his face caused us all to watch without a word. Around
and around he turned the handle slowly. Finally he stopped. Then, with
a few quick turns, he gave the door a pull and it swung open on its
oiled hinges.

We fairly gasped. “What is it?” I demanded. “Magic?”

Kennedy smiled. “Not magic, but black science,” he replied. “This is a
burglar’s microphone.”

“A burglar’s microphone?” I repeated. “What’s that?”

“Well,” he explained, “the microphone is now used by burglars for
picking combination locks. When you turn the lock a slight sound is
made when the proper number comes opposite the working part. It can
be heard by a sensitive ear, sometimes, I am told. However, it is
imperceptible to most persons. But by using a microphone it is an easy
matter to hear the sounds. Having listened to the fall of the tumblers,
the expert can determine what are the real numbers of the combination
and open the safe. That is what happened in this case.”

We followed Kennedy, speechless. What was there to say? We had already
seen him open a safe with it himself.

Though we were thus far on our way, we had not even a clue as to the
identity of the criminal or criminals.

I recalled Burke’s own theory as he had expressed it. Could it be that
some one had betrayed to a foreign government agent the priceless
secret of the telautomaton?




                                   V

                          THE WHITE LIGHT CAFÉ

“As long as I am back in the city,” continued Kennedy, while we stared
at one another, wondering what next move to make, “I think that I
had better take the opportunity to make some investigations in my
laboratory which would be impossible out at Westport.”

In the mean time Burke had been examining the burglar’s microphone,
turning it over and over thoughtfully, as if in the hope that it might
furnish some clue.

“It might have been possible,” he ruminated, “for some one to get into
the building at night if the night watchman was off his guard and he
had a key to the building. I suppose he might get out again, too, under
the same circumstances.”

“A good lead,” agreed Kennedy. “While you are finding the night
watchman and getting anything else along that line of reconstructing
what actually did take place it will give me just the chance I need.
Let us meet in two or three hours――say, at Mr. Hastings’s office. Let
me see, I believe your firm is Hastings & Halsey, isn’t it?”

“Hastings & Halsey,” repeated the lawyer. “You are quite welcome to
meet again there. You know where it is, on Wall Street?”

We noted the number and Kennedy and I hurried up-town to the laboratory
which we had left only a few short hours before.

Already there were waiting for him, by special messenger, the materials
from the autopsy which had been promised by the Westport coroner, who
for once had appreciated the importance of a case and had acted with
speed and decision.

Kennedy lost no time in throwing off his coat and donning his
acid-stained smock. For some minutes I watched him in silence as he
arranged his jars and beakers and test-tubes for the study which he
had in mind. He had taken some of the material and placed it over a
Bunsen burner in an apparatus which looked like a miniature still.
Another apparatus which he took from a cabinet was disposed on a table.
It seemed to consist primarily of three tubes. In one was a slit, and
through the slit evidently rays of light were caused to stream. Inside
I saw a lens. Each of the tubes seemed to radiate from a triangular
prism of some substance that looked like glass. Two of the radiating
tubes had an eye-piece and on one was a sort of scale.

As Kennedy made these rapid preparations he paused now and then to
study carefully the slivers of bright metal he had picked up from the
carpet in the state-room, while on a porcelain plate he placed the
powder which he had scraped from the brass fittings.

“I’m not doing you a bit of good here, Craig,” I remarked, at length.
“Isn’t there something I can do while you are working? I can come back
here in time to go down and meet Hastings and Burke with you.”

He paused a moment. “Yes,” he replied, “there is something that you
might be doing. I have been wondering just how intimate that little
Mexican dancer was with Marshall Maddox and whether Shelby actually
knew her in New York before he met her out at Westport the other night.
I think you might make some inquiries along that line, and by the time
you find anything you may find me more interesting also.”

Glad of the opportunity to be of service, for anything was better than
to sit about idle in the present high-keyed state of my nerves, I
started out.

My first impulse was to visit the New Amsterdam Club, one of the oldest
clubs in the city, of which I knew that Maddox had been a member.

I knew several men who were members, and I was sure that among them I
might find some one at the club at that time, and perhaps either from
him learn something of Maddox or at least obtain an introduction to
some one who did know.

I found that I had not acted without reason. In the big window that
overlooked Fifth Avenue, ensconced in the deep leather chairs, looking
out on the fashionable throng of shoppers who passed up and down the
Avenue, I found several men, among whom was Conigsby, whom I had known
for some time as assiduous first-nighter and man about town.

Conigsby welcomed me and I soon saw that the topic of conversation was
the reports that all had been reading in the papers about the mystery
that shrouded the death of Marshall Maddox.

“Peculiar fellow, Maddox,” commented Conigsby. “What do the boys down
on the _Star_ have to say about the case, Jameson?”

I had no desire to commit myself, yet I wanted to glean as much as I
could. For although we are prone to accuse the ladies of gossip, I
think most men will back me up when I say that there is no place for
the genuine article that cannot be beaten by a comfortable window in
a club where congenial spirits have gathered over a succession of
brandies and soda.

“It promises to be the great case of the year,” I returned, guardedly.
“So far, I understand there is much more in the life of Maddox than
even some of his friends suspect.”

At the mere suggestion of scandal all eyes were fixed on me. Yet I was
determined to speak in riddles and betray nothing, in the hope that
some of them might open up a rich vein of inquiry.

Conigsby laughed. “Perhaps more than _some_ of his friends
imagined――yes,” he repeated.

“Why, what was it?” inquired one of the group. “Is there another woman
in the case? I thought Maddox was divorced.”

“So he was,” returned the clubman. “I knew his wife, Irene, before they
were married. Really, it was a shame the way that man treated her.
I can claim no special virtue,” he added, with a shrug, “but then I
haven’t a wife――not so much as a friend who would care whether I was
here or in No Man’s Land. But Maddox――well, he was one of those men
who have worked hard all their lives, but in middle age seem to begin
sowing the wild oats they failed to sow in youth. You know the kind. I
guess he must have reached the dangerous age for men, if there is such
a thing.”

“What was it――chorus girls?” chimed in the other, ever ready for a
spicy bit of gossip.

“Yes――lately cabaret dancers――one in particular――at The White Light――a
little Mexican――Paquita.”

“What――Paquita?” chorused the group, and I could see by the inflection
that she was not unknown to several of them. “You don’t say. Well, you
must admit he was a good picker.”

“I rather suspect that his acquaintance cost him high, though,”
persisted Conigsby. “Paquita has a scale of prices. It costs so much to
take dinner with her. She’ll drive out of an afternoon with you――but
you must pay. There’s a union scale.”

“It takes dough to make tarts,” frivolously suggested another of the
group, forgetful of the tragedy that they were discussing.

Indeed, I was amazed at the nonchalant attitude they took. Yet, on
analysis, I concluded that it also might be significant. No doubt the
estimate of Maddox by his club members was more accurate than that of
the world at large.

“If it had been Shelby,” put in another man, “I wouldn’t have been
surprised.”

“Don’t worry,” interposed Conigsby. “Shelby Maddox is clever. Remember,
Shelby is young. Underneath his wildness there is ambition. I think
you’ll hear more of that boy before we are through. I know him, and
he’s likely to prove a chip off the old Maddox block. Nothing that
Shelby does would surprise me.”

“How about the other sister, Frances?” inquired another. “Do you know
her husband, Walcott?”

“Not very well. You’re more likely to find him on Broad Street than
Broadway. You know what I care for Broad Street. I’d never visit it
if my bankers were not down there. Walcott has a deuced pretty little
sister, though. I hear that Shelby is quite smitten.”

“Well, whatever you may think of him, I have seen Shelby Maddox with
Paquita, too. I’ll lay you a little bet that that little baggage knows
something about the case. Remember, the murder was on Shelby’s yacht.”

Conigsby shrugged. “Quite possible――another case of notoriety for The
White Light.”

“Notoriety for Paquita, you mean,” corrected another. “I hear she plans
to get back into musical comedy this fall. She’s not at The White Light
any longer.”

“Well, I think she’ll make good,” agreed Conigsby. “I wonder who the
angel is for her new show?”

The conversation was now hopelessly drifting, and I excused myself. At
least I had learned enough to give me an insight into another phase of
the life of Marshall Maddox.

Pondering what I had just heard, I decided to wander over toward the
café and theater district, and drop into the cabaret which they had
mentioned――The White Light.

As I entered the place in broad daylight I was struck by the sordidness
of it. Deserted except by those who were cleaning up for the coming
late afternoon and evening, it was positively tawdry. It needed the
glamour of bright faces and night life, and even then it must be viewed
through the bottom of a glass to wear even the semblance of attraction.

In the main dining-room of the café, grouped about the little dancing
floor before the platform on which sat the orchestra when things were
in full swing, stood innumerable little white tables. Just now there
seemed to be no one there except a man at the piano and a girl who was
evidently rehearsing her dance steps.

I paused for a moment and a waiter who had been arranging the tables
for the coming crowd moved over to tell me that the place was not yet
open.

I satisfied him that it was on other business that I had come, then
asked him whether Paquita was at The White Light any more.

“No, sir,” he replied, brusquely. “She hasn’t been here for several
days. I’ve heard that she has gone away to the country――has another
contract. It is a rehearsal for the girl who is to do her number that
is going on now. Is there anything I can do for you?”

I thanked him. It was not the waiter I wanted, but the proprietor,
Henri.

In a little office in the rear I at last discovered him, a rather
stout, genial Frenchman who had made a reputation as one of New York’s
restaurateurs to the _risqué_. I had known Henri once when I had the
assignment on the _Star_ that covered the theater and hotel district,
and I had no fear that he would not talk.

“Well, Henri,” I began cautiously, “I suppose you saw in the papers
this morning about your friend, Marshall Maddox?”

Henri, who was matching up checks showing the business done up to an
early hour of the morning, shrugged. “Monsieur was more the friend of
La Paquita than of me,” he returned, still matching checks.

“Still, he came here a great deal,” I asserted, taking a chance.

“_Oui_,” he agreed, “but it was not to see us. Always La Paquita, La
Paquita. So different from his brother.”

“Indeed?” I queried, quite overjoyed at the turn the conversation was
taking. “Then you know Shelby, too?”

“Ver’ well. Oh yes. He has been here. A fine fellow, but――it is all
right. Business is not for him. He is always ready for the good time――a
sport, you call it?”

I smiled. “Was he a friend of Paquita’s, too?” I hazarded, watching
Henri’s face.

He lifted his eyebrows a fraction of an inch. “No more than of the
rest,” he returned, with a deprecating gesture. “Pretty faces and
figures all look good to Shelby,” he added, with a smile; then,
seriously: “But he will settle down. We will see him here no more, some
day. Also I know his brother-in-law, Messtair Walcott. I do not like
him.”

“Why?” I asked, somewhat amused at getting his point of view.

“Too quiet. He will come in, not often, perhaps, bow, maybe speak, then
go away.”

I thought I “got” him. One must be a good spender to appeal to Henri.
I could not imagine Johnson Walcott as such. In fact, I could scarcely
imagine him coming to Henri’s at all.

“Paquita was quite intimate with Marshall Maddox, wasn’t she?” I
ventured again.

Henri brought into play his ready shrug. It was not for him to say
anything about his patrons, much less about the dead. Still, his very
manner gave the impression that his lips would not frame.

“Did any one ever seem to be watching him here?” I asked, the thought
of the sallow-faced man at Westport recurring to my mind.

Henri stopped matching his checks and looked up. Was he growing
suspicious of my disinterestedness?

“Such things are not unusual,” he answered, showing a fine assortment
of ivory beneath his black mustache.

I met his eye frankly. He seemed to understand.

“Not for the _Star_, you understand?” he nodded, still looking at me
fixedly.

“Oh, no, no!” I hastened, truthfully. “I am not playing reporter now,
Henri.”

He appeared to be satisfied, and it did not occur to him to inquire why
else I should be interested.

“Yes,” he went on, slowly, “he has been watched. I have seen it myself.
Several times there was a man who came in, Spanish-looking.”

“Did Mr. Maddox know it?” I inquired, more eager than ever.

Henri shook his head negatively. “Not until one day when La Paquita
was talking to the man. Monsieur came in unexpectedly.”

The manager laughed a little to himself.

“Why do you laugh?” I asked. “What happened?”

“Nothing,” he returned. “It was not what happened. It was what she told
him. So clever, too. She said it was a detective set to trail him by
Mrs. Maddox, that she had flirted with the man and found out.”

“Then you do not think he was a detective?” I asked, puzzled.

“How should I know?” replied Henri, with another question. “It might
have been. It might not have been. She is clever.”

“What did Maddox do?” I persisted. “Was he more cautious?”

Again Henri shook his head. “He gave orders that the man was not to be
admitted. And we? He was a ver’ wealthy man, Mr. Maddox. We could not
afford to lose him.”

“But this Spaniard,” I reiterated, convinced it was the same man whom
we had seen at Westport, “isn’t it possible that Mrs. Maddox really did
pick him out as a detective in the hope that he might get acquainted
with Paquita and so report on her husband?”

“We are just guessing, monsieur,” dodged Henri. “I speak only of the
things I know――and not all of them.”

He had evidently told me in substance about all that he was sure of. I
knew him of old. Even after he had told his story he liked to leave a
sort of “continued in our next” at the close of it, just so that you
would not think he was not what Broadway calls a “live one.” I had
absorbed about all that he had at first hand. It was enough. It gave
me a view of the characters of the chief actors, from an angle which
others did not know. I rose nonchalantly, thanked Henri, and sauntered
out as I had in the old days when the _Star_ picked on me to expose
some new society scandal.

The visit to Henri’s White Light cabaret had shown me one very
important thing, however. Shelby Maddox had known Paquita before the
night of the gay dinner party preceding the arrival of the Maddox
family for the conference on the yacht.

What that might indicate I did not yet venture to guess. And yet I felt
sure that it must prove significant. Else why had Paquita arrived at
Westport at just that particular time? It seemed as though it must have
something to do with the calling of the family conference.

Above all, however, stood forth the strange coincidence of the
murder of Marshall Maddox, head of the family, and the stealing of
the telautomaton, the most valuable single piece of property that the
family owned. There was mystery enough in this case to satisfy even
Kennedy.




                                   VI

                             THE POISON GAS


A glance at my watch was sufficient to assure me that I should have no
time for further inquiries if I wanted to meet Kennedy before going
down to the office of Hastings. I wanted to do that, too, for I felt
sure that Craig would talk more freely to me than to the rest, and my
interest in the affair had by this time become insatiable.

Accordingly, I retraced my steps to the laboratory. Kennedy was still
at work, partly over some reactions in test-tubes, but mostly using
the strange three-tubed instrument I had noted. As I outlined to him
rapidly what I had discovered and the plain inferences to be drawn from
it, he listened attentively, still working.

“Very good,” was Kennedy’s sole comment as I concluded my story.
“That’s very interesting――possibly very important. It begins to look as
though Maddox had been in some one’s way and that that some one was
taking no chances in order to ‘get’ him.”

“What have you discovered so far?” I hesitated, not sure yet whether he
was willing to talk, for Kennedy never said anything, even to me, until
he was perfectly sure of his ground.

“Marshall Maddox was not drowned, at least,” he vouchsafed.

“Not drowned?” I repeated, more to lead him on than because I was
surprised.

“No. Whatever was the cause of his death, he was not killed by
drowning. The lungs and stomach show that. In fact, I knew at Westport
that he might have died a natural death or might even have been a
suicide. But he certainly did not die of drowning. Only more careful
tests than either the coroner or I could make at Westport were
necessary.”

“How did it happen, then?” I continued, emboldened by his apparent
readiness to talk.

Kennedy took a bottle with a ground-glass stopper and held it up so
that I could see its greenish-yellow contents. Then he pulled out the
stopper, covered with vaseline, for an instant and shoved it back again.

The instant was enough. A most unpleasant odor filled the laboratory.
I felt a sense of suffocation in the chest, an irritation in the nose
and throat, as though by the corrosive action of some gas on the air
passages.

“If we could only have seen him before he died,” continued Kennedy,
“I suspect we should have found his face as blue as it was when we
did see him, his lips violet, his pulse growing weaker until it was
imperceptible, and perhaps he would have been raising blood. It would
have been like an acute bronchitis, only worse. Look.”

From a little pin prick which he made on his own thumb Craig squeezed
out a drop of blood into a beaker containing some distilled water.

“This is a spectroscope,” he explained, touching the instrument I had
noticed. “I think you are acquainted with it in a general way. Blood in
water, diluted, shows the well-known dark bands between what we call
‘D’ and ‘E.’ These are the dark bands of oxyhemoglobin absorption.
Now, I add to this, drop by drop, the water from that bottle which
I uncorked. See――the bands gradually fade in intensity and finally
disappear, leaving a complete and brilliant spectrum devoid of any
bands whatever. In other words, here is a substance that actually
affects the red coloring matter in the blood, bleaches it out, and does
more――destroys it.”

I listened in amazement at the fiendish nature of his discovery.

“Marshall Maddox was overcome by the poison gas contained in a
thin-shelled bomb that was thrown through his state-room window. The
corrosion of the metal in the room gave me a clue to that. Then――”

“But what is this poison gas?” I demanded, horrified.

Kennedy looked at me fixedly a moment. “Chlorine,” he replied,
simply; adding, “the spectroscope shows that there is a total absence
of pigment in the blood. You can readily see that it is no wonder,
if it has this action, that death is sometimes so rapid as to be
almost instantaneous. Why, man alive, this thing destroys without
the possibility of reconstitution! It is devilish in the quantity he
inhaled it.”

I could only gasp with surprise at the discovery.

“But how was it done?” I repeated. “You think a bomb was thrown through
the open port?”

“Without a doubt. Perhaps, as you guessed, from a boat outside, the
roof of a cruiser, anything, as far as that end of it goes. Whoever did
it might also have entered the room in the same way.”

“Entered the room?” I asked.

“Yes, wearing a mask composed of several layers of gauze impregnated
with glycerinated solution of sodium hypophosphate. That is one of
many substances used. All that was necessary was to wet the mask with
water and adjust it. It would have served a double purpose――to protect
the wearer’s life as well as his identity.”

Amazed at Kennedy’s powers of reconstruction from evidence that looked
so slender, I merely waited for him to proceed.

“Then whoever it was probably rifled his clothes and so obtained the
keys to the building and the office. From the brief-case they must
have extracted the copies of the telautomaton plans. After that it
was a simple matter to throw the body overboard in the hope that the
affair might possibly be covered up as an accident or suicide. In the
course of the night the wind cleared the room of the gas. They did not
reckon, however, on what science can discover――or if they did, cared
little. After that, I suppose, some one went to New York, perhaps in a
high-powered car.”

“Mito couldn’t have gone to New York――and got back again,” I exclaimed,
impulsively, recalling that Mito had been seen ashore that night
without apparent reason.

“Mito may or may not have played his part,” was all that Kennedy would
comment.

He left me wildly speculating. Was Mito a cog in the wheel, of which
Paquita and the gang suspected by Burke were other cogs? Was Shelby
Maddox also a cog, willingly or unwillingly? Could he have got away
from the yacht and got back again? A host of unanswered questions raced
through my mind. But Kennedy had said all that he was prepared to say
now.

“We had better be going,” he remarked, calmly, “if we are to keep that
appointment with Hastings and Burke.”

He was evidently much more interested in what Burke might turn up than
in his own investigation, which was quite natural, for what he had told
me was already an old story to him, and his restless mind craved to be
speeding toward the solution of the mystery.

Half an hour later Kennedy and I entered the office of Hastings. I
looked about curiously. There were, as in many lawyers’ offices, two
private offices for the members of the firm, while outside was a large
room for the clerks, the stenographers, and the telephone girl.

As we were welcomed by Hastings in his own office I wondered what the
walls might have heard. Marshall Maddox and his lawyer must have had
many conferences there during the time that Maddox was planning his
great coup in the munitions company.

“Burke hasn’t arrived yet,” remarked Hastings, nervously. “I’ve been
expecting him any moment. I wonder what is keeping him?”

There was no way of finding out, and we were forced to sit impatiently.

A few moments later we heard hurried footsteps down the hall and Burke
burst in, his face flushed with excitement.

“This thing is devilish,” he exclaimed, looking keenly at Hastings. “I
must be in your class.”

“How’s that? Did some one shoot at you?” queried the lawyer.

“No, but I came within an ace of being poisoned.”

“Poisoned?” we inquired, incredulously.

“Yes. You know I started to find that night watchman. Well, I found
him. He knows nothing――and I think he is telling the truth. But after I
had questioned him I made him admit that sometimes he takes a meal in
the middle of the night. Of course he has to leave the front hall of
the ground floor unguarded to do so. I figured that the robber might
have got in and got away during that time. And I guess I’m right.

“After that I saw the policeman who walks the beat at night. I
thought he was going to prove a better witness. He remembers, under
questioning, seeing a speedster that stopped around the next corner and
was left there standing some time――about the time that the robbery
must have taken place, if I am right. He thought it was strange and
hung about.

“When the fellow who drove the car came back the policeman walked over.
The fellow offered no explanation of leaving his car on the street
at such an hour, except that he had stopped to shift a shoe that had
blown. Then he asked where there was an all-night lunch-room. The
policeman directed him and the fellow thanked him and drove off in that
direction.”

“But the poisoning,” prompted Craig. “How did that happen?”

“I’m coming to it. Well, I thought at once of going to the lunch-room
and inquiring. You see, I thought I might check up both the night
watchman’s story and the cop’s. So I went in and it happened that the
night man was just going to work. I hadn’t had anything to eat since
this morning and I ordered a sandwich and a cup of coffee. I left the
coffee standing on a little table while I talked to the man behind the
counter.

“I found out from him that the night watchman had been there, all
right. But he didn’t remember any one in a speedster. In fact, I hadn’t
expected that he would. I don’t believe the fellow went there.

“Anyhow, when I went to look for my coffee I noticed something on the
lip of the cup. It looked like sugar, and I recollected that I hadn’t
put any sugar in the coffee. Besides, this looked like powdered sugar,
and I wouldn’t have put powdered sugar in when there was lump sugar. I
tasted a bit of it. It was bitter――very bitter. Here’s some of it.”

Kennedy took from Burke a few particles of a white powder which he
had carefully preserved in a piece of paper and began examining the
particles closely.

“There were lots of people coming and going at the lunch-room,” went on
Burke, “but I didn’t pay much attention to any of them.”

Kennedy had placed just a particle of the powder on his tongue, and
was now making a wry face. As he turned toward us he exclaimed,
“Strychnine!”

“See?” nodded Burke, excitedly. “I thought it was some poison. I knew
there was something wrong.”

Burke looked at Kennedy fixedly. There could be no doubt now that we
were watched. Some one was evidently desperate to prevent discovery.
First the attack had been leveled at Hastings. Now it was Burke. Who
would be next? I think we all realized that we were marked, though
none of us said anything at the time.

Burke looked over questioningly at Kennedy.

“I’ve found out how Maddox was killed,” volunteered Craig,
understanding the query implied in his glance.

“Indeed――already?” interrupted Hastings, to whom Kennedy was already
frankly incomprehensible.

“How?” demanded Burke, checking himself in time to protect himself
from setting forth a theory of his own, for Burke was like all other
police detectives――first forming a theory and then seeking facts that
confirmed it.

Eagerly both Burke and Hastings listened as Kennedy repeated briefly
his discoveries of the spectroscopic tests which he had already told me.

“Gassed, by George!” muttered Burke, more puzzled than ever. “I may as
well admit that I thought he had been thrown overboard and drowned.
The shot at Mr. Hastings rather confirmed me in the rough-neck methods
of the criminal. But this burglar’s microphone and the strychnine have
shaken my theory. This fellow is clever beyond anything I had ever
suspected. And to think of his using gas! I tell you, Kennedy, we don’t
know what to expect of criminals these days.”

Burke shook his head sagely. At least he had one saving grace. He
realized his own shortcomings.

“How about the speedster?” reverted Kennedy, passing over the subject,
for both Craig and I had a high regard for Burke, whatever might be his
limitations. “What did the patrolman say the fellow in the speedster
looked like?”

Burke threw up his hands in mock resignation. “As nearly as I could
make out, he looked like a linen duster and a pair of goggles. You know
that kind of cop――doomed always to pound pavements. Why, it might have
been anybody――a woman, for all he knew.”

“I think we’ve been away from Westport long enough,” concluded
Kennedy. “Perhaps our unexpected return may result in something. A
speedster――h’m. At least we can look over the garage of the Harbor
House.”

I remember that I thought the words of little consequence at the
moment. Yet, as it proved, it was a fateful statement made at this time
and place.




                                  VII

                         THE DIVORCE DETECTIVE

At the Westport station, when our train pulled in, there was the usual
gathering of cars to meet the late afternoon express from the city.

As we four were searching for a jitney ’bus to take us down to the
Harbor House I caught sight in the press of cars of the Walcott car.
Sitting in the back were Winifred and her sister-in-law, Mrs. Walcott,
sister of the murdered man. They had come up to meet her husband,
Johnson Walcott, who now came down the platform from the club car,
which had been well forward.

The train was pulling out, clearing the road across the track, and as
it did so there flashed past a speedster with a cream-colored body, a
shining aluminium hood, and dainty upholstery. No one could have failed
to notice it. As if the mere appearance of the car was not loud enough,
the muffler cut-out was allowing the motor to growl a further demand
for attention.

In the speedster sat Paquita, and as we looked across from our jitney I
caught sight of Winifred eying her critically, turning at the same time
to say something to Mrs. Walcott.

Paquita saw it, too, and shot a glance of defiance as she stepped
her dainty toe on the gas and leaped ahead of all the cars that were
pulling out with passengers whom they had met.

“Did you get that?” whispered Kennedy to me. “Not only have we
a mystery on our hands, but we have something much harder to
follow――conflict between those two women. Shelby may think he is a
principal in the game, but one or the other of them is going to show
him that he is a mere miserable pawn.”

“I wonder where she could have been?” I speculated. “That road up past
the station leads to the turnpike to the city. Could she have been
there, or just out for a spin?”

Kennedy shook his head. “If we are going to follow that color-scheme
about the country we’ll need to get a car that can travel up to the
limit.”

“Well,” snorted Burke, “it does beat all how these dancers can sport
cars with special bodies and engines that would drown out the hammers
of hell; but――I suppose it would cut down the work of us detectives by
half if it weren’t so.”

Hastings said nothing. Perhaps he was calculating the cost of the
outfit that had just passed, and wondering whether the bill had been
paid by his client――or some one else.

The Walcott car had got away and we were now jolting along in our more
modest flivver, eager to get back to the scene of our labors and learn
what had taken place in our absence.

Back at the Harbor House Burke’s man, Riley, was waiting, sure enough,
with a full budget of news as we entered quietly by another than the
main entrance and drew him off in a corner.

“What’s happened?” demanded Burke.

“Plenty,” returned Riley, his reticence before us now overcome. “You
remember that dark-skinned fellow?” he asked, excitedly.

“An unnecessary question,” returned Burke. “He has not been out of
my thoughts since I left. I hope you’ve watched him closely. We saw
Paquita. She must have slipped through your fingers. You’ll have to get
a car that can keep up with her, Riley, if we are going to handle this
affair successfully.”

“Yes, sir,” agreed Riley, evidently relieved that his chief had not
administered a severer rebuke. “I was about to tell you of how she
slips away from us in that car, sir. Well,” he graced on, as though
eager to change the subject, “we have not only found out who that
spiggoty chap is, but that he has reported to Mrs. Maddox finally,
to-day. It seems as though she has paid him for his work of watching
her husband, and now that Mr. Maddox is dead has no further use for
him.”

“And he has gone away?” asked Craig.

“No,” replied Riley, quickly, “that’s just the point. Even though she
has discharged him――at least that is what it looks like――he is sticking
around. At first I thought he was watching Paquita――and he is. But
twice I have caught him talking to her. It may be that it’s all right.
I don’t get it at all. I can’t make out yet whether he is with her or
against her.”

“That’s strange,” agreed Burke, turning to Kennedy. “I don’t understand
that. Do you? Do you suppose the fellow has been double crossing Irene
Maddox all the time? These divorce sleuths are an unprincipled lot,
usually.”

Kennedy shook his head non-commitally. “I think it will be worth
looking into,” he considered. “Has anything else happened?”

“Plenty,” replied Riley cheerfully. “Since you went away Shelby Maddox
has given up living out on the _Sybarite_, I understand. He is to live
at the Harbor House all the time, and has brought his stuff ashore,
although he hasn’t been about much. He is another one who has a
speedster that can do some traveling.”

“What do you make of that move?” encouraged Hastings.

Riley shrugged. “Sometimes,” he remarked, slowly, “I think he is
watching the others. I don’t know yet whether he does it because he
suspects something of them, or because he thinks they suspect something
of him. Anyhow, he has brought that Jap, Mito, ashore, too. Is he
afraid of him? Has Mito something that gives him a leverage on Shelby
Maddox? I don’t know. Only, it’s mighty strange.”

“Has Mito done anything suspicious?” asked Kennedy.

“His whole conduct is suspicious,” asserted Riley, positively. “Why
was he in town so late last night? Besides, the fellow is well
educated――too well educated to be a servant. No, sir, you can’t make me
believe that he is here for any good. He’s clever, too. They tell me
he can run a motor-boat or a car as well as the best. And he’s quiet.
There’s something deep about him. Why, you can see that he knows that
he is being watched.”

“But what has he done?” emphasized Kennedy.

“N-nothing. Only, he acts as though he was covering up something. I
know the symptoms.”

I tried to analyze our feelings toward Mito. Was it merely that Riley
and the rest of us did not understand the subtle Oriental, and that
hence we suspected everything we did not understand? There was no
denying that Mito’s actions out on the _Sybarite_, for instance, had
been open to question. Yet, as far as I knew, there was nothing on
which one could place his finger and accuse the little man, except his
alleged presence in town so late the night before.

From the corner in which we were sitting we could see through an open
window the porte-cochère beside the hotel at which guests were arriving
and departing.

“Look!” pointed out Riley. “There’s Shelby Maddox now.”

His motor had purred up silently around the corner of the road
that led about the shore, and as he pulled up before the door the
omnipresent Mito appeared from nowhere. Shelby crawled out from under
the steering-wheel and turned the car over to Mito to run around to the
hotel garage. For a moment he stood talking to the Jap, giving him some
parting instructions, when another car tooted its horn and came up to
the steps. It was the Walcott car. Evidently they had not come directly
from the station, but had taken a little ride along the shore to get
the stuffy air of the railroad train out of Johnson Walcott’s lungs.

It was just the opportunity Shelby wanted. He quickly waved to Mito to
pull away and turned to the new arrival, opening the rear door before
the officious starter could get to it, and handing out Winifred Walcott
most attentively――so much so that he forgot all about his own sister
and Johnson Walcott.

He and Winifred stood talking, evidently about Shelby’s own departing
roadster, for they were looking after Mito as he shot up the road to
the garage.

“Do you guess what they are talking about?” queried Kennedy to me. “I
would be willing to wager that I can reproduce at least a part of the
conversation. As they watched the speedster get away she spoke first,
and he nodded his head in the negative as he replied. She spoke again,
and he nodded in the affirmative――and smiled.”

“What was it?” I asked.

“Remember Paquita? So does Winifred. First she asked Shelby if his
roadster was hard to drive――or something of the sort. He said it was
not. Then she asked whether he would show her some of the fine points
of driving it――I am sure that Winifred Walcott can drive, for she looks
like that sort of a girl. Shelby fairly leaped ahead like his motor
does when he feeds it gas. That was easy long-distance eavesdropping.”

“What are they talking about now?” I demanded, rather spoofing him than
serious, for Shelby was standing on the steps yet, quite oblivious to
everything about him except Winifred.

“I don’t know,” he confessed, “but I can predict that something will
happen in thirty seconds. Look up the road.”

I glanced away. Paquita in her speedster was shooting down as though
she had a fourth speed. A second, and she had pulled up, leaping
lightly to the ground. She nodded gaily to the starter to take her
car for her to the garage, and bounded up the steps, not neglecting
to display a generous vision of a trim ankle that almost caused the
starter to turn the car up the steps instead of wide from the Walcott
car.

Deliberately she passed close to Shelby, as though to show him the
contrast between the fluffy little girl of the morning and the motor
girl of the afternoon. She smiled sweetly at Shelby, not neglecting
a quick glance of superciliousness at Winifred, such as only a true
actress can give.

At that moment Irene Maddox appeared in the door, to greet Johnson
and Mrs. Walcott. Paquita had not seen her, nor if she had would she
probably have avoided the dramatic meeting.

For an instant the two women were face to face. Men would have been
at each other’s throats in a brutal grip. Paquita was no less brutal.
Without turning an eyelash she looked steadily into the face of the
woman who had been so grievously wronged, and for all the surprise or
emotion she displayed she might have been gazing at a bisque ornament.
Irene Maddox, stately in her black suit of mourning, drew herself
to her full height and the color in her cheeks deepened as her eyes
flashed at the other woman.

Paquita swept on gaily. She was supremely happy. She had gone up-stage
and had thrown two bombs.

From our coign of vantage I saw that another was watching. It was our
sallow-faced friend, who smiled darkly to himself as he watched, then,
a moment later, was gone, observed by none of them.

Paquita had passed. One might have easily paraphrased “Pippa Passes,”
and it was not God who was in his heaven, either, nor was all right
with the world.

The group at the porte-cochère glanced at one another, and for the
moment each was reminded of his own particular hate and rivalry.
Shelby was plainly chagrined. He had been getting along famously with
Winifred, when a cold shower had been plunged over him. Irene Maddox
had received a sharp reminder of her trying position. Frances Walcott
was again a Maddox, unsoftened by the tragedy. Winifred listened
while Shelby tried to finish what he had been saying, but nothing was
the same as before. Only Johnson Walcott seemed able to remain the
unconcerned outsider.

All turned into the hotel now, and as they separated and disappeared I
wondered whether Paquita had been trailing about and had deliberately
framed the little incident. What was the meaning of the continued
observation by the man of the sallow face?

Just then one of the boys came through the lobby, where we were sitting
in the angle, calling “Mr. Sanchez! Mr. Sanchez!”

From around the angle, where he could not have seen us, appeared the
sallow-faced individual who had so disturbed our thoughts. He took the
telegram which the boy carried, tore it open, and read it. As he did so
his face, lined with anger, happened to turn in our direction and he
saw us. Without appearing to notice us, he slowly tore the telegram as
well as the envelope and stuffed the pieces into his pocket. Then he
turned and coolly sat down again as though nothing had occurred.

“At least we know that one of his names is Sanchez,” commented Kennedy.
“I’d like to see that message.”

“You’re not likely to see it now, unless we can pick his pocket,”
returned Burke. “Don’t look around. There comes Mito.”

The Japanese padded silently past, unconcerned, casting no look at
either our party or Sanchez. But I knew that his beady eyes had already
taken us in. I felt that he was watching us. But was it for his own or
some one else’s benefit?

I determined that, given an opportunity, I would try to find out two
things――what the telegram contained and why Mito had been in town the
night before.

It was the dinner hour, and the guests of the Harbor House, either
singly or in groups, were stringing into the brilliantly lighted
dining-room, where the orchestra had already tuned up. We moved over,
nearer the door, as Shelby Maddox, all alone, placed his hat on the
rack and entered, allowing the head waiter to seat him.

“Let us go in and observe them,” decided Kennedy. “Hastings, you
brought us out here. It will look queer if we all go in together. So
I think that you, Burke, and Riley had better sit at another table in
another part of the room; then we won’t appear to be all together and
we may get more, too.”

Accordingly, Hastings, Kennedy, and I entered, and by a little
manœuvering managed to get ourselves placed by a window where we could
see pretty much everything that went on.

Winifred Walcott was already there, at a table with her brother, her
sister-in-law, and Irene Maddox. They did not seem to be talking much.
I wondered what could be the matter. Perhaps it was fancy, but it
seemed as if the two older women were not quite so friendly as they
had been when I saw them in the automobile in the morning. Johnson
Walcott also said little, but appeared to be engrossed in reading the
despatches from Westport in the papers. None of them ate as though they
enjoyed it, and all seemed preoccupied, especially Winifred, who let
dish after dish go untasted. What had she on her mind? Was it solely
Paquita?

I looked over at a table on the other side of the room where there was
a lone diner, Shelby Maddox. He, too, was preoccupied. He had placed
himself so that he could catch the eye of Winifred whenever she chose
to cast it his way. But though he was never off guard, she did not
choose. Something, too, was seriously affecting his appetite. As far
as food was concerned, his presence was a mere formality.

“There’s something strange going on in that family,” I commented at
length.

Hastings smiled dryly. “They can’t agree, even on a tragedy,” he
returned. “What you have seen so far to-day was merely a lull in the
storm. And now, if that is complicated by outsiders――well, we shall
need all Mr. Kennedy’s acumen if we are to untangle the snarl.”

Kennedy appeared oblivious to the compliment, which was something
for Hastings to pay, for very little in this mundane sphere met the
approval of his legal mind. Craig was studying a large mirror at the
end of the dining-hall thoughtfully. I turned and placed myself as
nearly as possible in the same angle of vision.

“Please, Walter,” he cautioned, “your head is opaque――I mean to the
human eye, old man.”

My one glance had been sufficient to whet my curiosity. By means of the
mirror he could see around an “L” in the dining-room, and there, at a
little table, alone, was seated Paquita. She had chosen the coign of
vantage quite apparently because it put her in range of Shelby, without
its being apparent to the other guests. But Shelby was busy. He had not
even noticed Paquita, in his eagerness to catch the crumb of a glance
from Winifred’s table.

Not being able to watch Paquita without interfering with Kennedy,
and finding the strained relations of the others rather tiresome, I
glanced out on the veranda by the window where our table stood. Some
one was pacing quietly up and down. Almost with a feeling of certainty
I strained my eyes in the darkness.

“That Sanchez is outside, watching everything,” I called Craig’s
attention.

He nodded.

At the other end of the dining-room Burke and Riley were quite as busy
as we were, observing how those whom we were watching acted when they
were all together.

The Walcott party finished dinner first and soon afterward rose and
left the room. Down in the Casino there was dancing every night, but,
of course, they did not go there. Instead, they chose a secluded
corner of the porch at the Lodge. Though there was no lost cordiality,
apparently they did not want to separate. At least they had their
conflicting interests in common.

Shelby needed nothing but a finger-bowl in order to finish his dinner,
and left hurriedly, much to the astonishment of the waiter.

Burke and Riley had already gone out and had disappeared when we
followed shortly.

Prompted by Kennedy, Hastings sauntered around to the end of the porch
which the Walcotts and Mrs. Maddox had occupied. Shelby Maddox had
already joined them, unable to keep away from Winifred longer.

One could feel the constraint of the party, although to an outsider it
might readily have been accounted for by the tragedy. However, we knew
by this time that there was something deeper.

Shelby was apparently endeavoring to overcome the impression which the
appearance and smile of Paquita had produced, but I could see that
Winifred was not yet entirely mollified.

The Maddox party welcomed us――not cordially, but at least not coldly,
for it was no part of their character ever to betray their real
feelings before one another.

As we drew up chairs I could feel the close scrutiny to which we were
being subjected.

“Well?” queried Shelby at length, after we had talked about several
inconsequential things, “what have you found out, Hastings?”

He said it in a tone that was meant to imply that he knew that some
kind of investigation was on. Was it bravado?

“Oh, several things,” returned Hastings, turning to Kennedy as if to
leave the answer to him.

“For one thing,” shot out Kennedy, taking advantage of the opportunity,
“we have determined that your brother died from the effects of a
poisonous gas――I won’t say yet what it was or how administered.”

The light from a window was shining full on Shelby’s face as Craig said
it, and he knew that we were all watching intently the effect it would
have.

“Is that so?” he replied, with an interest this time unfeigned. “I
suppose you know who did it?”

“I have an idea,” replied Kennedy, “a theory on which I am proceeding.
But it is too early to talk about it yet.”

If Shelby had been trying to “pump” us he was getting something to
think about, at least. I felt sure that Craig was telling the family
this much in the hope that it would spur them to some action, or at
least reach ears that would be affected.

It was while Kennedy was talking that I noticed that Winifred showed
her first real interest in what was going on about her. She was
about to ask a question when the sound of footsteps on the veranda
interrupted. If I had wondered what the cause of the coolness between
Shelby and Winifred was I had here a partial answer at least.

Again, as though to foment trouble, Paquita crossed the veranda and
walked slowly down the steps to the Casino, whence floated the rhythmic
strains of the orchestra. Though she did not know it, she produced the
result she sought. A few minutes later Winifred excused herself to
retire to her room, her question still unasked and unanswered.

Shelby bowed a reluctant good-night, but I could see that inwardly
he was furious. And I felt impelled to ask myself, also, why Paquita
was so apparently dogging Shelby’s every step. Could it be that the
notorious little heart-breaker was actually in love with him――or had
she some darker motive?




                                  VIII

                              THE PULMOTOR

Shelby was plainly angry and disconcerted. For the moment he seemed to
hesitate between hurrying after Winifred and striding down the steps
toward Paquita, as though to demand an explanation of her haunting
appearances and disappearances.

In the moment that elapsed during his indecision he seemed to think
a second time and to check both impulses. Better, he evidently
considered, to affect to ignore the matter altogether.

Still, he could not conceal his chagrin. Nor was it lost on the others.
The Maddox family were watching one another like hawks. Each knew that
the other knew something――though not how much.

Winifred’s desertion seemed to throw a damper on the entire group. As
for Shelby, life had lost its attraction for him with Winifred Walcott
gone. He was about to make some excuse to leave the party, then
decided that perhaps he might better stay. If anything was going to be
said or to happen, at least he would learn it. Meanwhile I noticed that
Johnson Walcott was covertly observing Shelby, who seemed to be aware
of the scrutiny of the brother of the girl with whom he was in love. I
felt that Shelby would not antagonize Walcott at least.

“Then you are getting closer to the truth of the death of my brother?”
inquired Shelby.

“Step by step,” replied Kennedy. “I am trying now to reconstruct what
might have been hidden in his private life.”

Irene Maddox gave a quick glance at Kennedy. The others were silent.
It was a queer family. There was no word of grief for Marshall Maddox.
Each seemed merely to consider what bearing the tragedy might have on
his own fortune.

A moment later Walcott excused himself, pleading that he had some
letters to write, and passed slowly down the porch in the direction of
the office and writing-room. His wife, however, and Irene Maddox showed
no disposition to move. None of us said anything about the incident,
but I know that I did a lot of wondering why the mere appearance of
Paquita seemed to break up the party each time as though a shell had
burst. Was there something lying back which neither Kennedy nor myself
knew anything about? Was it more than revenge or jealousy?

As for myself, somehow I had become mightily interested in the drama
of the little Mexican dancer and Shelby, whatever it might be. How did
Sanchez complicate it? Could it be that Burke was right and that he was
an international crook? Besides, Mito was on my mind now more than any
of the Maddoxes in the group, anyhow.

Accordingly, I leaned over and whispered to Kennedy. “I’d like to
follow that girl Paquita and watch her a bit.”

“Very good, Walter,” he whispered back. “See if you can find her. I
want to stay here with Hastings and talk to them. Molasses will catch
more flies than vinegar. I will stick along until there is an open
break.”

Glad of the release he had given me, I made some excuse to the party,
and without seeming to do so wandered off from the Lodge toward the
Casino in the direction taken by Paquita. As I approached the Casino,
which was now ablaze with lights and gaiety, I paused outside in the
shadow to survey the long line of snowy white tables on a balcony whose
outlook was directly on the dark-blue waters of the bay and out between
the two necks of land into the Sound. It seemed a veritable fairy-land.

One after another, I scanned the faces of the parties at the tables in
the hope of catching a glimpse of Paquita, but she was at none of them.

As I stood in the shadow of a clump of shrubbery I was suddenly aware
that some one had crossed the thick grassy carpet and was standing
almost directly behind me. I turned to find Burke.

“I don’t suppose you have seen that Jap, Mito, about?” he asked,
modulating his voice.

“No,” I replied. “I just came down here. Kennedy and Hastings are on
the porch with the Maddoxes and I thought I might do some investigating
on my own account. Why? What has Mito been doing?”

Burke shrugged. “Perhaps nothing――perhaps much. Riley and I have been
strolling about the outside, on a chance. Once we found Mito sitting
apart, apparently looking out over the harbor, although I am sure that
that was not all he was doing. For when he saw Paquita coming down
the path, almost before we knew it he had given us the slip in the
darkness. I think he had been waiting for her to appear.”

“Where is she?” I asked. “It was really to follow her that I came down
here.”

Burke nodded toward the dancing-floor of the Casino. “I suppose she is
in there,” he replied. “At least she was a moment ago. I would feel a
great deal safer in putting my finger on her than on that Jap. He is
eely. Every time I think I have caught him he gets through my grasp.
It may be that he is only a faithful servant to his master, although
I would like to be convinced of it. All the time that you and Kennedy
were up there on the veranda he was watching. I don’t know what Paquita
did, but when she walked down he spotted her in a moment――and was gone.”

“That’s just the point,” I hastened. “She didn’t do a thing except pass
near us and bestow a sweet smile on Shelby. It’s the second time since
we got back from the city. I can’t make out what she is up to, unless
it is to separate the lovers.”

“I think I shall try to see Kennedy,” concluded Burke.

“All right,” I agreed as he turned away. “You’ll find him at the Lodge
on the porch. I am going to stay here awhile and see what Paquita does.
How about Sanchez?” I recollected.

“Nothing at all,” imparted Burke as he left me. “Since dinner he seems
to have dropped out of sight entirely.”

Burke having left me, I sauntered into the light, and, being alone,
chose a table from which I could see both the dancers and the gay
parties at the other little round tables.

Intently my gaze wandered in toward the dancing. The lively strains
of a fox-trot were sending the crowded couples ricocheting over the
polished floor. It was a brilliant sight――the myriad lights, the
swaying couples, the musical rhythm pervading all.

Sure enough, there was Paquita. I could pick her out from among them
all, for there was none, even among these seasoned dancers, who could
equal the pretty professional.

Dancing with her was a young man whom I did not recognize. Nor did it
seem to matter, for even in the encore I found that she had another
partner. Without a doubt they were of the group of the younger set
to whom Paquita was a fascinating creature. What, if anything, her
partners might have to do with the Maddox mystery I was unable to
determine, though I inclined to the belief that it was nothing.
Sophisticated though they may have thought themselves, they were mere
children in the hands of Paquita. She was quite apparently using her
very popularity as a mask.

From my table on the terrace over the bay I caught sight of a face, all
alone, which amazed me. Johnson Walcott was quite as much interested in
Paquita as any of the younger set.

It was too late for me to move. Walcott caught sight of me and soon
had planted himself in the chair opposite.

“What do you make of that girl?” he asked, finally, as though frankly
confessing the object of his visit to the Casino.

I was on guard. I did not want to admit to any of the family that
neither Kennedy nor myself had fathomed her. “I don’t know,” I replied,
carefully avoiding the appearance of having come down solely to watch
her. “She seems to be quite interested in the Maddox family.”

Walcott laughed as though to indicate to me that he understood that
I knew the scandal. Just then Paquita caught sight of us together. I
thought she seemed distrait. She rose and a moment later disappeared
through the French window.

Inwardly I cursed Walcott for his intrusion at that moment, for under
the circumstances I could not abruptly jump up and leave him to follow
her. Yet it was just that second in which she was gone.

The dancing seemed to have no attraction for her to-night. Evidently
there was something lying back in her strange actions. More than likely
she had come down to the Casino for the sole purpose of passing Shelby
again when Winifred was present.

As soon as I conveniently could I managed to detach myself from
Walcott, but, as I had expected, by the time I got around to the French
window through which Paquita had gone she was nowhere about.

What of Sanchez? Where was he? I loitered about for a moment, then
slowly mounted the steps that led back to the Lodge, intending to
rejoin Kennedy and Hastings.

When I reached the porch again all were gone. Shelby had got away,
and the others had either gone to their rooms or to the more lively
corridor of the hotel. I looked about, but could see neither Kennedy
nor Hastings. They, too, seemed to have disappeared on some mission.

What I would do next I did not know. Suddenly there flashed through my
mind the thought of the high-powered car that the policeman had told
Burke of seeing near the Maddox Building the night before.

I wondered whether there might not be some clue that I might obtain
from the garage back of the Lodge. There must be at least two
speedsters there, Paquita’s and Shelby’s. Perhaps there were others. At
least I might find out whether either of them had been out the night of
the murder. Having nothing better to do, I determined to make a little
tour of investigation in that direction myself.

As I made my way to the rear of the hotel I saw that there were indeed
two garages, one large one that was most generally used and a smaller
one that looked as though it might have been built as an afterthought
to accommodate an overflow of cars. The smaller one was near and I
determined to examine it first. It was dark, too, as though not being
used except over week-ends, when the hotel was crowded.

Almost before I was aware of it it seemed as if I saw a figure flit
past a window. Perhaps it was my imagination. At any rate I would not
have conscientiously sworn to it, for my attention at the time was
directed at the other, lighted, garage.

The impression was enough, however. I quickened my pace until I came to
the dark building. Mechanically I tried the door, fully expecting that
it would be locked. To my surprise, it was open, and before I realized
it I had swung the door and my foot was on the threshold.

“Who’s――”

The words were scarcely out of my lips when a spit of fire in the
blackness of the interior replied. For a moment my head seemed in a
whirl. Sight and hearing left me.

That is all I remember.

An hour later, vaguely, indistinctly, as though far away, I heard a
familiar voice calling me.

It seemed to be far off, and I struggled after it, blindly groping.
There seemed to be something over my face, something that covered my
eyes. I felt that if I could only get it off I would be all right. But
try as I would, I had not the strength.

Still, I was encouraged. The voice seemed nearer, more distinct. Was it
Kennedy’s? It sounded strangely like it.

I clawed again at the thing that seemed to keep me from him. To my
surprise it came off itself, leaving me blinking in a flood of light.

“Walter――are you all right?” I now heard the voice distinctly.

“Wh-where am I? What happened?” I gasped, feeling still a suffocating
sensation in the throat and chest, my mouth parched, dry and irritated,
and my nose tingling as though afire.

“Here in the garage,” replied Craig, holding a peculiar rubber face
mask in one hand, while Burke stood beside a sort of box about the size
of a suit-case from which rubber tubes ran to the mask. “I thought the
pulmotor would do the trick.”

“It’s lucky you are that there was a gas company in town that’s
up-to-date and has one of the things,” returned Burke, breaking back
into a vernacular more natural than that veneered on his honest
tongue. “Praise be that he’s all right. A night’s sleep will do him
good, don’t you say, Mr. Kennedy?”

“But――but what is it all about?” I choked, striving to get my feet, but
finding myself still a bit weak. My eye caught the motors and pumps
and tubes in the pulmotor, but that conveyed no idea to me. “Tell
me――Craig――who was it?”

“I wish I could, old fellow,” replied Craig, smoothing back my hair.
“We were just a bit late for that――heard the shot――dashed in, and found
you, of all people. How did you come here?”

Propped up gently by Craig, I told what I could of the story, though
there was next to nothing to tell.

“Whoever it was,” I concluded, pressing my aching temples ruefully, “he
had just time to get away. You heard a shot? Am I wounded? What’s that
pulmotor for?”

“Not wounded,” Craig returned. “But you can be thankful we had that
thing and that the gas in this asphyxiating pistol was not chlorine.
I don’t know what it was――possibly sabadilla veratrine, some of those
things they’re using abroad in asphyxiating bombs.”

“Whoever it was, he was prepared for us here,” called Burke, who, now
that I was out of danger, had turned his attention to the garage
itself. “He’s removed whatever might be incriminating. It’s all as
clean as a whistle here. Some one expected us.”

“I knew that all along,” returned Craig, quietly. “Walter blundered
into a trap that was set for me.”

I felt the pressure of his hand on mine. It was worth it all to know
that I had at least saved Kennedy something, even if I had accomplished
nothing.

“But who could have known that we were going to the garage?” I asked.

Kennedy was silent a moment.

“Some one is spying on us――knows our movements, must know even what we
talk about,” he said, slowly.

We looked at one another blankly. It was uncanny. What could we do?
Were we in the hands of a power greater than any of us had imagined?




                                   IX

                        THE TRAILING OF PAQUITA


Rapidly recovering now from the effects of the asphyxiating gun,
thanks to the prompt aid of Kennedy, I was soon able to sit up in my
improvised bed on the garage floor. As well can be imagined, however,
I did not feel like engaging in very strenuous activity. Even the
simple investigation of Burke, as he explored the garage, seemed like a
wonderful exhibition of energy to me.

“Well, there certainly is no car here now,” he remarked as he surveyed
the obvious emptiness of the place.

“Which is not to say that there has not been one here recently,”
added Kennedy, who was now dividing his attention between me and the
building. “Some one has been here with a car,” he added, pointing
to some fresh oil spots on the floor, and bending down beside them.
“Jameson’s inhospitable host has evidently taken the pains to remove
all traces that might be of any value. See――he has obliterated even
the tire tracks by which the car might have been identified.”

“Must have had great respect for your ability,” remarked Burke, also
examining the marks that showed how carefully the floor had been gone
over to guard against leaving a clue. “Whoever it was was clever enough
to keep just a jump ahead of us. Not a single trace was left. I wonder
who it could be?”

“I’ve narrowed it down to two theories,” interposed Burke’s Secret
Service man, Riley, always fertile with conjectures, “but I can’t say
which I prefer. To my way of thinking, either the presence of Mito in
the town last night would explain everything, or else this all has
something to do with the telegram that we saw the sallow-faced Sanchez
receive.”

Either conjecture was plausible enough, on the face of it. Kennedy
listened, but said nothing. There seemed to be no reason for remaining
longer in the garage.

“How do you feel now, Walter?” asked Craig. “Do you think you could
stand being moved to the hotel?”

An oppressive dizziness still affected me, but I knew that I could not
continue to lie on the damp floor. With Kennedy’s aid, I struggled to
my feet.

Barely able to walk, and leaning heavily on his arm, I managed to make
my way from the garage and across the bit of lawn to the side veranda
of the Harbor House. Still weak, I was forced to drop into a wicker
chair to recover my strength.

“Why, Mr. Jameson, what is the matter?” asked a woman’s voice beside us.

I looked up to see Winifred Walcott. Evidently when she left us she had
not gone to her room.

As Craig told her briefly what had happened, she was instantly
sympathetic.

“That’s strange,” she murmured. “I felt restless and I was strolling
about the paths back of the Lodge. I heard the shot――thought it was an
automobile tire or a back-fire. Why, not ten minutes before, I am sure
I saw Paquita with Shelby’s valet, Mito.”

Burke whispered to Riley, who nodded and disappeared with alacrity.

I thought of the cordiality I had often observed between Mexicans and
Japanese. Was that the case in this instance? Could it be that Paquita
knew something about the attack on me? Was Mito the mysterious attacker?

It was scarcely a moment later that Johnson Walcott appeared around the
corner, evidently seeking his sister.

Just then Riley returned, dragging the reluctant Mito.

“Where have you been?” bellowed Burke.

The little Jap’s face was impassive.

“I was sitting just outside the servants’ quarters, sir, most of the
evening,” he returned, in bland surprise.

“Think a moment,” shouted Burke, advancing close to him and peering
into his face. “Who have you been talking to? Tell me, and mind you
tell the truth――or it’ll go hard with you.”

“With no one, sir,” asserted Mito, positively.

Burke was by this time red in the face with rage as all that he had
ever learned in his third-degree days came to the surface.

“You lie!” he exclaimed. “I saw you with――”

“Well,” demanded a voice, interrupting, “what’s all this? What has Mito
been doing?”

It was Shelby Maddox, who had been attracted from the lobby by the loud
voices.

“Doing enough,” returned Burke. “Some one’s taken a shot at Mr. Jameson
in the garage. Now, look here, you little brown brother. Do you
mean to tell me that you haven’t been with any one all the evening?
Think――think hard.”

Mito protested, but Burke was not satisfied.

“Don’t try to hide it,” he urged. “This lady saw you.”

Shelby gave a quick glance at Winifred. Then he turned to Mito. “Tell
him,” he commanded.

“Only Miss Paquita passed me once,” replied the Jap. “She did not say
anything. I saw Mr. Jameson, too, before, on the shore by the Casino.”

It was clever, whatever else it might be. No matter what either Paquita
or I might say later, Mito had protected himself. He had admitted
everything and confessed nothing.

Burke was far from satisfied. He was about to turn to Winifred when her
brother interposed.

“Winifred,” interrupted Johnson Walcott in a tone approaching
authority, “I think you had better not get mixed up in this affair.”

“Quite right,” agreed Shelby. “I see no reason why Miss Walcott should
be annoyed by this cross-examination.”

Winifred looked open defiance at her brother’s interference.

“I can promise you that if I find that Mito has been doing anything he
should not, I shall be responsible for him,” smoothed Shelby.

A moment later both Winifred and her brother left. She still resented
his brotherly interference.

Burke had not got anywhere with his questioning and Kennedy apparently
believed that the time for such a course was not yet ripe.

“I think the best thing we can do is to get Jameson to his room,” he
suggested, by way of cutting off an unprofitable examination before any
damage was done.

Burke accepted the broad hint. While Shelby and Mito withdrew, Hastings
and Craig between them managed to get me up to our room and to bed.

As I lay there, glad enough to be quiet, we held a hasty conference to
consider the strange attack that had been made.

“What I don’t understand,” I repeated, “is how any one should know that
we ever thought of visiting either that garage or the other.”

Kennedy had been saying very little. As Hastings and I talked he seemed
to be thinking over something deeply. Suddenly his face registered the
dawn of an idea.

“To-morrow, Hastings,” he exclaimed, “we must go into town. I want to
go to your office. As for to-night, there doesn’t seem to be anything
more that we can do. Burke and Riley are on guard down-stairs. I think
Walter needs a good rest. So do we all. Good night, Mr. Hastings. I
will see you to-morrow early.”

A night’s rest fixed me up all right and I was anxiously down in the
lobby early next morning.

Fortunately nothing further of any great importance had happened
during the night and I felt a sense of satisfaction at not having
missed anything. Among us all we had been able to keep a pretty close
surveillance on those in Westport whom we suspected might have any
information. The day before had brought with it a grist of new mystery
instead of clearing up the old, but Kennedy was happy. He was in his
element, and the harder it was to crack the nut the more zest he put
into the cracking of it.

To my surprise, the morning express found the entire Maddox family,
except Irene Maddox, gathered on the platform of the quaint little
station.

“What do you suppose has given them this sudden impulse to go in to
town?” whispered Kennedy to Hastings.

The lawyer shrugged. “I shouldn’t be surprised if they were getting
back into their normal state after the first shock,” he replied, dryly.
“I think they are all going to consult their various attorneys――Shelby
probably will see Harvey, and Mrs. Walcott and her husband will see
Duncan Bruce.”

As we waited for the train I realized why it was that Westport was
popular. The little town was not only within fair access to the city,
but it was far enough away to be beyond the city’s blight. Going back
and forth was so easy that each of the contending parties was able to
take it as a matter of course that he should go to New York.

The crowning surprise came, however, just a moment before the express
swung around the curve. The cream-colored speedster swung up to the
platform, turned, and backed in with the other cars. No one could miss
it. The beautiful Paquita jumped airily out, more baffling than ever in
her artificiality.

As I watched her my former impression was confirmed that the notoriety
which she courted was paradoxically her “cover.” She seemed to seek
the limelight. In so doing did she hope to divert attention from what
was really going on back-stage? It would have been a bold stroke.
I expressed my idea to Kennedy. He smiled, but not with his usual
indulgence. Was it his own idea, too?

Nothing occurred during the ride in to town in the chair-car, except
that each was still furtively watching the other and all were watching
Paquita. Paquita was trying desperately to attract the notice of
Shelby. The young man seemed greatly embarrassed. As he sat beside
his sister I saw that Frances Walcott was keenly appreciative of the
efforts of the little dancer.

Once I excused myself on the pretext that I wanted another morning
paper, and walked forward into the smoking-car. It was as I had
suspected. Sanchez was there.

“I think we had better split our forces,” planned Kennedy, when I
reported to him what I had seen. “Sanchez, I suppose, will trail along
after Paquita. In that case, Walter, I shall leave them to you. I want
to handle Shelby myself. Meet me at the laboratory and then we can go
down to your office, Mr. Hastings. And, by the way, if you will take a
hint from me, sir, you will be careful what you do and what you say at
your office. I think you’ll understand when I see you there again.”

The astonished look on Hastings’s face was quite worth study. It
was as though some one had told him to guard his thoughts. The very
possibility that there could be a “leak,” which was evidently the way
in which he interpreted Kennedy’s cryptic remark, had never seemed to
occur to him, so sure was he about those whom he employed.

Nothing more was said about the matter, however, and as our train
rolled through the under-river tube into the station the various groups
began to break up as we had expected.

With a parting word from Kennedy I wormed my way through the crowd in
the direction of the cab-stand and was already in a cab and half-way
up the ramp to the street when, looking back through the little glass
window, I saw, as I had expected, Paquita trip gaily up to the same
starter and enter another. On the avenue a stop gave me ample time to
tip my driver and instruct him to follow the cab that was coming up
back of us. Then by settling back from the windows I was able to let
Paquita’s cab pass and pick her up again without her knowing that she
was being trailed. Without looking back, I knew that Sanchez had tried
to follow, but it was not until we had gone several blocks and made
a sudden turn into Broadway that I realized, on looking cautiously
around, that somehow he had missed out. Perhaps there had not been
another cab on the instant. Anyhow, I was not myself followed.

On up-town Paquita’s cab proceeded, until finally it stopped before a
building which I knew to be full of theatrical agencies and offices. I
could not, of course, follow her into the office into which she went,
but I managed to find out that she had gone to the office that had
recently been opened by a company that proposed to put on a new feature
in the fall known as La Danza Mexicana. It seemed like a perfectly
legitimate business trip, yet according to my idea Paquita was merely
using her notoriety to attract those whom she might use for her own
purposes. What interested me was whether it was purely money or a
deeper motive that actuated her.

From the office of her agent she hurried over to Fifth Avenue, and
there she made several lengthy stops at fashionable costumers,
milliners, and other dealers and designers of chic wearing apparel. In
all this there seemed to be nothing to take exception to and I became
weary of the pursuit. It was not her legitimate theatrical career that
interested me.

However, so it went until the lunch hour arrived. Quite demurely and
properly she stopped at a well-known tea-room where tired shoppers
refreshed themselves. I swore softly under my breath. I could not well
follow her in, for a man is a marked card in a tea-room. To go in was
like shouting in her ear that I was watching her.

Therefore, I stayed outside and, instead of lunching, watched the
passing crowd of smart shoppers while the clock on the taximeter
mounted steadily.

I had fidgeted in my cab for perhaps half an hour when I became aware
that mine was not the only cab that was waiting in the neighborhood. In
these shadowing jobs one has to keep his eyes glued on the door through
which the “subject” must exit, for it is unbelievable how easily a
person, even when not aware of being watched, may slip out into a
crowd and disappear. Consequently I had not paid much attention to my
surroundings.

But once when I leaned forward to speak to my driver, who by this time
was fully convinced that I was crazy, I happened to glance across the
street. At the window of another cab I saw a familiar face. Sanchez had
lost Paquita at the station, but by some process of reason had picked
her up again at the tea-room. I was determined more than ever now to
hang on to both of them.

Luncheon over, Paquita finally emerged, still alone. What business she
may have transacted over the telephone during her various stops I do
not know. What I wanted was for her to feel perfectly free, in the hope
that she might do something. Yet she had not given me the satisfaction
of meeting a single person whom she should not have met.

Again her cab started on its round, but this time it rolled back into
the theater district.

My driver almost jolted me from the seat as he stopped once. I looked
ahead. Paquita’s cab had pulled up before the office of a well-known
music publisher and she was getting out.

To my surprise, however, instead of entering she deliberately turned
and walked back in the direction of my cab. I sank farther back into
its shallow recesses, trusting that she would not glance my way.

A dainty creation of headgear intruded itself through the open window
of my cab.

“You have been following me all day, Mr. Jameson,” purred Paquita in
her sweetest tone, as her baffling brown eyes searched my face and
enjoyed the discomfiture I could not hide. “I know it――have known it
all the time. There’s another cab, too, back of you. I’ve been going
about my own business――haven’t I?――making arrangements for my new show
this fall. You haven’t anything――except a bill, have you? Neither has
the man in the other cab. Now I’m going to go right on. You are welcome
to follow.”

Before I could reply she had swept disdainfully back and had entered
the building. Chagrined though I was at the way she had led the chase,
I determined to stick to her, nevertheless.

In the publishing house she remained an uncommonly long time, but when
at last she came out I saw that she gave a little petulant glance first
to see whether I was still there.

Her cab shot away, but my man was alert and we trailed along down the
avenue. Twice, now, I saw her looking back at me. That, at least, was
some encouragement. Perhaps vexation might impel her to do something.

As we came to a tangle of cars crossing Longacre Square, Paquita leaned
forward through the front window of her taxicab and deliberately turned
the wheel that the driver was steering. The unexpected interference
caused him to stop suddenly.

As my driver pulled up, there came a crash and a smashing of glass
behind me. His pulling up had fortunately thrown me forward. The car
in which Sanchez was riding had crashed into mine, and only my being
thrown forward prevented me from receiving the shattered glass.

Instantly the traffic policeman was beside us and a crowd began to
collect. Before I knew it Paquita in her taxi was off and there was no
possibility of following.

Where she was going I could not now find out. Perhaps there was, as
Burke suspected, a gang, and she had all day been seeking to get to
their rendezvous. As I watched the officer and the crowd blankly, I had
but one satisfaction. At least Sanchez could not follow, either.

Quickly I gave the policeman my name as a witness, glanced at the
“clock,” and paid my taxicab bill. Sanchez saw what I did and that
it was no use for him to try to get away. He paid his own bill and
deliberately turned away, on foot, and walked down Seventh Avenue.

A few feet behind I followed.

He paid no attention to me, but kept on down-town, until at last I
realized that we had come to the neighborhood of the railroad terminal.

At the station he turned, and I knew that he had decided to take the
early train back to Westport. Still following, I went through all the
motions of having also decided to take the train myself. I let Sanchez
go through the gate, then at the last moment retreated and walked over
to the telegraph office as the gate banged shut.

I would not have missed the appointment with Kennedy and Hastings
for anything, and the train, except for one stop, was an express to
Westport. A wire to Riley out there would prevent Sanchez from getting
away from sight, even if he should decide to get off at the only other
stop.

What the little dancer was up to was just as mysterious as ever.




                                   X

                       THE DETECTAPHONE DETECTOR


Kennedy was waiting impatiently for me at the laboratory and enjoyed a
quiet laugh at my expense when I told him of my fiasco in untangling
the secret of Paquita.

“Is there any news?” I asked, hastily endeavoring to change the subject.

“Yes,” he replied, glancing at his watch. “Irene Maddox and Winifred
have come in to town on a later train. As nearly as I can make out
they’ve joined forces. They have a common hatred of Paquita, whatever
else they may lack.”

“How do you know they are here?” I queried.

“They have called me up and made an appointment to meet me at the
laboratory. They ought to be here any minute, now. I’m glad you came.
I shouldn’t like to meet them alone. I’d rather have some one as a
witness. It’s strange that they should be seeking to have me work for
them,” considered Kennedy.

“What do you mean,” I asked. “Hastings sought you out first. It may be
quite natural that Irene Maddox should consult the detective retained
by her former husband’s lawyer in such a case. Have any of the others
been after you?”

“Yes,” he replied, thoughtfully. “After I left you this morning I had a
most peculiar experience. Shelby Maddox is either the most artless or
else the most artful of all of them.”

“How is that?” I inquired.

“Just as I said,” repeated Kennedy. “Shelby hurried into one of those
slot-machine telephone booths in the station and I slipped into the
next one. Instead of calling up, I put my ear to the wall and listened.
There wasn’t anything much to what he said. It was merely a call to
his lawyer, Harvey, telling him that he was on his way down-town. The
strange thing came afterward. By that time the station was cleared of
those who had come on the train. Shelby happened to glance into the
other booth as he left his own and saw me in the act of making a fake
telephone call. Instead of going away, he waited. When I came out, he
looked about quickly to see if we were alone, then took my arm and
hurried me into another part of the station. I didn’t know what was
coming, but I was hardly prepared for what he said.”

“And that was?” I asked, eagerly.

“That I work for him, too, in the case,” exclaimed Kennedy, to my utter
surprise.

“Work for him?” I repeated. “Was it a stall?”

Kennedy shook his head doubtfully. “I’m not prepared to say. It was
either clever or simple. He even asked me to go down-town with him and
see Harvey.”

“And you went?”

“Certainly. But I can’t say I learned anything new. I haven’t quite
decided whether it was because they knew too much or too little.”

“Are you going to do it? What did you tell him?”

“I told him quite frankly that as long as I had come into the case as I
was――without mentioning any names or facts――the best I could do was to
see that he got a square deal.”

“Did that satisfy him?”

“Not much. But it was all that I would say. At least it gave me a
chance to study him at close range.”

“What do you think of him?”

“Shelby Maddox is nobody’s fool,” replied Kennedy, slowly. “I may not
know his story yet, but I have begun to get his number.”

“How about Harvey?”

“A very clever lawyer. Shelby will keep out of a great deal of trouble
if he takes Harvey’s advice.”

The sound of footsteps down the hall outside interrupted us, and an
instant later the laboratory door opened. Irene Maddox entered first
and for a moment Winifred stood in the doorway, rather timidly, as
though not yet quite convinced that she was right in coming to Kennedy.

Kennedy advanced to greet them, but still Winifred did not seem to be
thoroughly reassured that the visit was just the proper thing. She
looked about curiously at the instruments and exhibits which Kennedy
had collected in his long warfare of science against crime, and it
was evident that she would a great deal rather have had this a social
visit than one in connection with the case. I guessed that it was Irene
Maddox who had urged her on.

“I――we’ve come to see you about that woman, Paquita,” began Mrs.
Maddox, almost before she had settled herself in one of our
easy-chairs, which Craig had installed to promote confidences on the
part of his clients.

Mrs. Maddox’s voice was trembling slightly with emotion and Winifred’s
quick glance at Kennedy indicated that Paquita had furnished the
leverage by which Mrs. Maddox had persuaded Winifred to accompany her.

“Yes,” encouraged Kennedy, “we have been watching the young lady――and
others――with some interest. Do you know anything about her that you
think we ought to know?”

“Know anything?” repeated Mrs. Maddox, bitterly. “I ought to know that
woman.”

Her feelings were easily understood, although as far as I could see
that did us very little good in getting at the real mystery that
surrounded the little dancer.

“You must have noticed,” went on Mrs. Maddox, nervously, “how she is
hanging around out there. For weeks and months I have been watching
that woman. Sometimes I think they are all in league against me――the
lawyers, the detectives, everybody.”

Kennedy was about to say something, then checked himself. How could we
know but that this was merely an attempt to find out just how much it
was we knew? I longed to ask about Sanchez, yet felt that it would be
better not to disclose how much――or rather how little――we actually had
discovered.

“Why,” she continued, “it even seems as if her hostility was leveled
against Winifred, too.”

Winifred said nothing, though it was evident that she was consumed with
curiosity to find out what hold, if any, Paquita had on Shelby.

“Then you really do not know who or what Paquita is?” asked Kennedy,
directly.

“I know that she is an adventuress,” asserted Mrs. Maddox. “Mr.
Hastings has always professed to know nothing of her. At least so he
has said. Even when I have watched her I must admit I have found out
only what she was doing at that time. But my intuition tells me that
there is something more. Oh, Professor Kennedy, is there no such thing
as _justice_ in this world? Must that woman continue to flaunt herself
brazenly before me? Cannot you _do_ something?”

“You may depend on it,” assured Kennedy. “I shall make my
investigation――arrive at the truth. Even my own client cannot prevent
me from doing that. And if I find that an injustice is being done, you
may be sure that I will do my best to set it straight. More than that
I could not say even to Shelby Maddox this morning when he asked me to
take up the case for him.”

Both women glanced quickly at Kennedy. The mention of Shelby’s name
came, quite apparently, as a surprise to them. Winifred seemed rather
more reticent now than ever before. It was evident that Irene Maddox
had not succeeded in what she had intended. Yet she did not betray her
disappointment.

“Thank you,” she said, rising. “Then I may expect you to help me――I
mean us?”

“In every way in my power,” promised Kennedy, accompanying them to the
door.

Kennedy looked after them as the door closed. “I wonder what that visit
was for,” he considered as their footsteps died away.

Having no answer for the query, I attempted none.

“What has Burke been doing?” I inquired, suddenly recollecting the
Secret Service man. “Have you heard anything from him to-day since we
came to the city?”

“Yes,” he replied, opening a cabinet. “Burke has undertaken some work
along another line in tracing out the telautomaton robbery and what may
have become of that model. I haven’t heard from him and I don’t imagine
that anything will develop right away in that direction.”

“What is that?” I inquired, watching Craig as he took from one cabinet
an apparatus which appeared to consist of two coils, or rather sets
of wires, placed on the ends of a magnet bar. He began to adjust the
thing, and I saw from the care with which he was working that it must
be an instrument of some delicacy.

“Just an instrument that may enable me to discover how that attack was
made on you last night,” Kennedy answered, perfunctorily, forgetting
even my question as he worked over the thing.

For several minutes I watched him, wondering at the strange turn of
events that had sent both Shelby and Winifred secretly to Kennedy.

“By the way,” exclaimed Craig, suddenly looking at his watch, “if we
are to meet Hastings and accomplish anything we had better be on our
way down there.”

In the Subway Kennedy relapsed into a brown study of the events of the
day, only breaking away from his reverie as, above the rattle and bang
of the train, he tapped the package he was carrying.

“I was just thinking of that garage incident of yours last night,” he
remarked. “What struck you as being peculiar about it?”

“The whole thing,” I replied, smiling weakly. “I leaned into
trouble――and got it.”

“Just so,” he returned. “Well, do you realize that the only mention we
made of the garage was when we were talking in Hastings’s office? Think
it over.”

He relapsed again into his study and nothing more was said until we
arrived at Wall Street.

Hastings was waiting for us, nervously pacing the floor. Evidently the
warning Kennedy had given had impressed him. He had been so afraid of
even his own shadow that he had scarcely transacted any business at all
that day.

“Kennedy, I’m glad to see you,” he greeted. “What has happened to-day?
What’s that?”

“Nothing much,” returned Craig, vaguely, although his face was not
at all vague, for he had placed his finger on his lips and was most
vigorously pantomiming caution.

Carefully he unwrapped the paper about the coils I had seen. Then he
set the instrument on Hastings’s desk, unscrewed an electric-light
bulb from its socket and attached a wire to the socket. After a final
careful adjustment he placed something to his ear and began walking
quietly about the room, a tense, abstracted, far-away look on his face,
as now and then he paused and listened, holding the free end of the
apparatus near the wall, or a piece of furniture, wherever he chanced
to be.

What he was looking for neither of us could guess, but his caution had
been emphatic enough to halt any question we might have.

Over and over he passed the free end of the apparatus along wall and
floor. At each stop he seemed to be considering something carefully,
then with a negative nod to himself went on.

This had been going on for some fifteen minutes, when he stopped in the
corner back of a coat-tree. He looked about as he pulled the thing
from his ear, saw a heavy pair of shears on Hastings’s desk, and seized
them.

Deliberately he dug into the plaster of the wall, while Hastings and I
bent over anxiously.

He had not gone half an inch before he began to scrape very carefully,
as though he were afraid of hurting something alive.

I looked. There, in the wall, back of the plaster, hung a little
telltale black disk. I recognized it the instant I saw it and turned
quickly, just in time to prevent a question from Hastings.

Some one had been using the detectaphone against us!

Though not a word was said, I realized vaguely what Kennedy later
explained. He had suspected it and had made use of a method of finding
pipes and metals electrically, when concealed in walls under plaster
and paper.

It was a special application of the well-known induction balance
principle. One set of coils on the magnet bar received an alternating
or vibrating current. The other was connected with a little sensitive
telephone. Craig had first established a balance so that there was
no sound in the telephone. When the device came near metal piping
the balance was destroyed and a sound was heard in the telephone.
He had located all the water, steam, and other pipes, the wires
from the telephone, the messenger-call box, and other things. There
still remained one other pair of wires unaccounted for. The balance
had located their existence and exact position. Clever though the
installation of the little mechanical eavesdropper had been as an aid
to crime, Craig’s detectaphone detector had uncovered it!

Impulsively I seized at the devilish little black disk that had
forewarned some one and had nearly cost me my life. I started to yank
at it. The wires yielded their slack, but before I could give them a
final pull Kennedy grasped my hand.

Without a word he wrote on a pad on the desk:

“Leave it there. They don’t know we’ve found it. We can use it against
them!”




                                   XI

                              THE FRAME-UP


Hastily Craig wrote on the paper, while Hastings and I read in silence:

“We’ll lay a trap by a fake conversation about the garage.”

Neither of us spoke a word, waiting for our cue from him.

“Well,” he said, in a rather loud tone, as though he had just come into
the office, “one thing that we must do is to find out whether there was
a car that came into the city from Westport that night――and perhaps
went back there. There’s a clue in that garage, Walter. Some one is
making that a headquarters. But we can’t do anything to-night――not
after your experience. No, we’ll have to wait until daylight to-morrow
and then we’ll make a thorough search.”

“You won’t get me there again alone at night,” I put in, and my tone
was rather convincing after my experience.

“I’m sure there’s something there, all right,” added Hastings,
following the lead, although he seemed to have only the most indefinite
notion of where it took him.

“Indeed there is,” agreed Kennedy, quickly.

“Personally, I think that Mito knows more than he should about the
whole business,” I added. “The Jap is a mystery to me.”

“And Sanchez, too,” put in Hastings, evidently thinking of how he
seemed always to be crossing our path.

“Yes, that’s the place to look into, all right,” concluded Craig,
beckoning us to leave the room and the conversation.

“If that doesn’t sink into somebody’s mind,” he chuckled, when we were
outside, “I shall be surprised. We must get back to Westport before it
is too late.”

“Why didn’t you follow the wire down and find out where it ended?” I
asked, as we left Hastings’s office. “You might have――”

“Surprised a stenographer at the other end taking notes,” he
interrupted. “We can do that any time. What I wanted was to plant
something that would make the real criminal act and throw him off his
guard. We’ll have to stop again at the laboratory. There’s something
there I must take out with me. That will give us just time to catch the
late afternoon express if we hurry.”

While Hastings and I waited outside Kennedy went in and soon returned
with the instrument he sought. Even yet, Hastings could not resist the
impulse to gaze about nervously, recalling the shot that had been fired
at him on the occasion of his first visit. Nothing happened this time,
however, and we made the train by a matter of seconds.

Frances Maddox and her husband were the only persons on the express
whom we knew. The others seemed to have returned already. I saw that we
would have to rely on Riley and the Secret Service men to get anything
that might have happened in the meanwhile. Once or twice I caught
the eye of Mrs. Walcott furtively gazing in Kennedy’s direction, and
I fancied she was a trifle nervous. Walcott himself read a magazine
stolidly, as though declining to get excited, and I wondered, from his
manner, whether the affair and the constant feud in the family into
which he had married might not be getting on his nerves. They did not
talk much, nor did we, and it was with a sense of relief that we all
arrived finally at Westport.

“Well,” I remarked, aside to Kennedy, as we three piled into the little
“flivver” that did public hack duty at the station, “I wonder what we
shall run into now.”

“Things ought to develop fast, I should say,” he returned. “I think
we’ve laid a good foundation.”

Without even looking about or inquiring for Burke or Riley, Kennedy
rather ostentatiously went directly to the hotel office on our arrival
at the Harbor House.

“Our rooms are at the north side of the hotel,” he began. “I wonder if
there are any vacant on the bay side?”

The clerk turned to look at his list and I took the opportunity to
pluck at Kennedy’s sleeve.

“Why don’t you get rooms in the rear?” I whispered. “That’s the side on
which the garage is.”

Kennedy nodded hastily to me to be silent and a moment later the clerk
turned.

“I can fix you up on the bay side,” he reported, indicating a suite on
a printed floor-plan.

“Very fine,” agreed Craig. “If you will send a porter I will have our
baggage transferred immediately.”

As we left the desk Kennedy whispered his explanation. “Don’t you
understand? We’ll be observed. Everything we do is watched, I am
convinced. Just think it over. Selecting a room like this will disarm
suspicion.”

In the lobby of the hotel Riley was waiting for us anxiously.

“Where’s Mr. Burke?” asked Kennedy. “Hasn’t he returned?”

“No, sir. And not a word from him yet. I don’t know where he can be.
But we are handling the case at this end very well alone. I got your
wire,” he nodded to me. “We haven’t missed Sanchez since he got back.”

“Then he didn’t make any attempt to get away,” I remarked, gratified
that I had lost nothing by not following him on the earlier train. “Is
Paquita back?”

“Yes; she came on the train just before yours.”

“What has she done――anything?”

Riley shook his head in perplexity.

“If it didn’t sound ridiculous,” he replied, slowly, “I would say that
that fellow Sanchez was on the trail of Paquita more than we are.”

“How’s that?”

“Why, he follows her about like a dog. While we’re watching her he
seems to be watching us.”

“Perhaps he’s part of her gang――her bodyguard, if there is such a thing
as a gang,” I remarked.

“Well, he acts very strangely,” returned Riley, doubtfully. “I’m not
the only one who has noticed it.”

“Who else has?” demanded Kennedy, quickly.

“Mrs. Maddox, for one. She went up to the city later――oh, you know?
Miss Walcott went with her. You know that, too? They returned on the
train with Paquita.”

“What has Mrs. Maddox done since she came back?” inquired Craig.

“It wasn’t half an hour before they returned that Paquita came
down-stairs,” replied the Secret Service man. “As usual Sanchez was
waiting, in the background, of course. As luck would have it, just as
she passed out of the door Mrs. Maddox happened along. She saw Sanchez
following Paquita――you remember she had already paid him off for the
shadowing he had done for her. I don’t know what it was, but she went
right up to him. Oh, she was some mad!”

“What was it all about?” asked Craig, interested.

“I didn’t hear it all. But I did hear her accuse him of being in with
Paquita even at the time he was supposed to be shadowing her for Mrs.
Maddox. He didn’t answer directly. ‘Did I ever make a false report
about her?’ he asked Mrs. Maddox. She fairly sputtered, but she didn’t
say that he had. ‘You’re working for her――you’re working for somebody.
You’re all against _me_!’ she cried. Sanchez never turned a hair.
Either he’s a fool or else he’s perfectly sure of his ground, as far as
that end of it went.”

“I suppose he might have double-crossed her and still made honest
reports to her,” considered Kennedy; “that is, if he made the same
reports to some one else who was interested, I mean.”

Riley nodded, though it was evident the remark conveyed no more idea to
him than it did to me.

“Shelby Maddox has returned, too,” added Riley. “I found out that he
sent that Jap, Mito, with a note to Paquita. I don’t know what it was,
but I have a man out trying to get a line on it.”

“Mito,” repeated Kennedy, as though the Japanese suggested merely by
his name a theory on which his mind was working.

There seemed to be nothing that could be done just now but to wait,
and we decided to take the opportunity to get a late dinner. Winifred
Walcott and Mrs. Maddox had already dined, but Frances Walcott and her
husband were at their table. They seemed to be hurrying to finish and
we did the same――not because they did, but because we had work to do.

Dinner over, Hastings excused himself from us, saying that he had some
letters to write, and Kennedy made no objection. I think he was rather
pleased than otherwise to have the opportunity to get away.

Outside we met Riley again, this time with one of his operatives.

“What’s the matter?” inquired Kennedy.

“Matter enough,” returned Riley, much exercised. “You know I told
you that Shelby had come ashore from the _Sybarite_ with Mito? Well,
we’ve been following them both pretty closely. I think I told you of
his sending a note to Paquita. Both Shelby and Mito have been acting
suspiciously. I had this man detailed to watch Shelby. That confounded
Jap is always in the way, though. Tell Mr. Kennedy what happened,” he
directed.

The operative rubbed his back ruefully. “I was following Mr. Maddox
down to the beach,” he began. “It was rather dark and I tried to keep
in the shadow. Mr. Maddox never would have known that he was being
followed. All of a sudden, from behind, comes that Jap. Before I knew
it he had me――like this.”

The man illustrated his remark by lunging forward at Kennedy and
seizing both his hands. He stuck his crooked knee upward and started to
fall back, just catching himself before he quite lost his balance.

“Over he went backwards, like a tumbler,” went on the man, “threw me
clean over his head. If it had been on a stone walk or there had been a
wall there, it would have broken my head.”

“Jiu-jitsu!” exclaimed Kennedy.

“I wonder why Mito was so anxious to cover his master?” considered
Riley. “He must have had some reason――either of his own or orders from
Maddox. Anyhow, they both of them managed to get away, clean.”

Riley looked from Craig to me in chagrin.

“Quite possibly orders,” put in the man, “although it’s not beyond him
even to be double-crossing Mr. Maddox, at that.”

“Well, try to pick them up again,” directed Kennedy, turning to me.
“I’ve some rather important business just now. If Mr. Burke comes back,
let me know at once.”

“You bet I’ll try to pick them up again,” promised the Secret Service
man, viciously, as we left him and went to our room.

There Craig quickly unwrapped one of the two packages which he had
brought from the laboratory while I watched him curiously but did not
interrupt him, since he seemed to be in a great hurry.

As I watched Kennedy placed on a table what looked like a miniature
telephone receiver.

Next he opened the window and looked out to make sure that there was no
one below. Satisfied, he returned to the table again and took up a pair
of wires which he attached to some small dry cells from the package.

Then he took the free ends of the wires and carefully let them fall out
of the window until they reached down to the ground. Leaning far out,
he so disposed the wires under the window that they fell to one side of
the windows of the rooms below us and would not be noticed running up
the side wall of the hotel, at least not in the twilight. Then he took
the other package from the table and was ready to return down-stairs.

We had scarcely reached the lobby again when we ran into Hastings,
alone and apparently searching for us.

“Is there anything new?” inquired Kennedy, eagerly.

Hastings seemed to be in doubt. “None of the Maddox family are about,”
he began. “I thought it might be strange and was looking for you.
Where do you suppose they all can be? I haven’t seen either Paquita or
Sanchez. But I just saw Winifred, alone.”

“What was she doing? Where is she?” demanded Kennedy.

Hastings shook his head. “I don’t know. I was really looking for
Shelby. I think she was going toward the Casino. Have you heard
anything?”

“Not a thing,” returned Kennedy, brusquely. “You will pardon me, I have
a very important matter in hand just now. I’ll let you know the moment
I hear anything.”

Kennedy hurried from the Lodge toward the Casino, leaving Hastings
standing in the hotel, amazed.

“Nothing new!” he almost snorted as he suddenly paused where he could
see the Casino. “Yet Hastings sees Winifred going out in a hurry,
evidently bent on something. If he was so confounded eager to find
Shelby, why didn’t it occur to him to stick about and follow Winifred?”

It was quite dark by this time and almost impossible to see any one in
the shadows unless very close. Kennedy and I took a few turns about the
Casino and along some of the gravel paths, but could find no trace of
any of those whom we were watching.

“I oughtn’t to let anything interfere with this ‘plant’ I am laying,”
he fretted. “Riley and the rest ought to be able to cover the case for
a time. Anyhow, I must take a chance.”

He turned and for several minutes we waited, as if to make perfectly
sure that we were not being watched or followed.

Finally he worked his way by a round-about path from the Casino, turned
away from the Lodge into another path, and at last we found ourselves
emerging from a little hedge of dwarf poplars just back of the little
garage, which had evidently been his objective point.

Mindful of my own experience there, I looked about in some trepidation.
I had no intention of running again into the same trap that had nearly
finished me before. Nor had Kennedy.

Cautiously, in the darkness, he entered. This time it was deserted.
No asphyxiating gun greeted us. He looked about, then went to work
immediately.

Back of the tool-box in a far corner he bent down and unwrapped the
other package which he had been carrying. As nearly as I could make
it out in the darkness, there were two rods that looked as though
they might be electric-light carbons, fixed horizontally in a wooden
support, with a spindle-shaped bit of carbon between the two ends of
the rods, the points of the spindles resting in hollows in the two
rods. To binding screws on the free ends of the carbon rods he attached
wires, and led them out through a window, just above.

“We don’t want to stay here a minute longer than necessary,” he said,
rising hurriedly. “Come――I must take up those wires outside and carry
them around the wing of the Harbor House, where our room is.”

Without a word we went out. A keen glance about revealed no one
looking, and, trusting that we were right, Kennedy picked up the wires
and we dove back into the shadow of the grove from which we came.

Carefully as he could, so that no one would trip on them and rip them
out, Kennedy laid the wires along the ground, made the connection with
those he had dropped from the window, and then, retracing our steps,
managed to come into the hotel from the opposite side from the garage
and the other wing from our room.

“Just had a wire from Mr. Burke,” announced Riley, who had been looking
all over for us, a fact that gave Craig some satisfaction, for it
showed that we had covered ourselves pretty well. “He’s coming up from
the city and I imagine he has dug up something pretty good. That’s not
what I wanted to tell you, though. You remember I said Shelby Maddox
had sent Mito with a note to Paquita?”

Kennedy nodded. No encouragement was necessary for Riley to continue
his whispered report.

“Well, Shelby just met her on the beach.”

“Met Paquita?” I exclaimed, in surprise at Shelby’s secret meeting
after his public ignoring of the little adventuress.

“On the beach, alone,” reiterated Riley, pleased at retailing even this
apparent bit of scandal.

“What then?” demanded Craig.

“They strolled off down the shore together.”

“Have you followed them?”

“Yes, confound it, but it’s low tide and following them is difficult,
without their knowing it. I told the men to do the best they could,
though――short of getting into another fight. Mito may be about, and,
anyhow, Shelby might give a very good account of himself.”

“You’re not sure of Mito, then?”

“No. No one saw him again after he threw my operative. He may have
disappeared. However, I took no chance that Shelby was alone.”

For a moment Kennedy seemed to consider the surprising turn that
Shelby’s secret meeting with the little dancer might give to the affair.

“Walter,” he said at last, turning to me significantly, “would you
like to take a stroll down to the dock? This matter begins to look
interesting.”

We left Riley, after cautioning him to make sure that Burke saw us the
moment he arrived, and again made our way quietly from the Lodge toward
the Casino, in which we now could hear the orchestra.

A glance was sufficient to reveal that none of those whom he sought
were there, and Kennedy continued down the bank toward the shore and
the Harbor House dock.




                                  XII

                           THE EAVESDROPPERS


It was a clear, warm night, but with no moon. From the Casino the
lights shone out over the dark water, illuminating here and seeming to
deepen the already dark shadows there.

A flight of steps ran down to the dock from the dance pavilion, but,
instead of taking this natural way, Kennedy plunged into the deeper
shadow of a path that wound around the slight bluff and came out on
the beach level, below the dock. From the path we could still hear the
sounds of gaiety in the Casino.

We were about to emerge on the beach, not far from the spiling on which
the dock platform rested, when I felt Kennedy’s hand on my elbow. I
drew back into the hidden pathway with him and looked in the direction
he indicated.

There, in a little summer-house above us, at the shore end of the dock,
I could just distinguish the figures of two women, sitting in the
shadow and looking out intently over the strip of beach and the waves
of the rising tide that were lapping up on it. It was apparent that
they were waiting for some one.

I turned and strained my eyes to catch a glimpse down the beach, but in
the blackness could make out nothing. A look of inquiry toward Kennedy
elicited nothing but a further caution to be silent. Apparently he was
determined to play the eavesdropper on the two above us.

They had been talking in a low tone when we approached and we must have
missed the first remark. The answer was clear enough, however.

“I tell you, Winifred, I saw them together,” we heard one voice in the
summer-house say.

Instantly I recognized it as that of Irene Maddox. It needed no
clairvoyancy to tell precisely of whom she was talking. I wondered
whether she was trying to vent her grudge against Paquita at the
expense of Shelby and Winifred. At least I could fancy how Shelby would
bless his sister-in-law as a trouble-maker, if he knew.

“I can’t believe that you are right,” returned the other voice, and it
was plainly that of Winifred.

There was a quiver of emotion in it, as though Winifred were striving
hard to convince herself that something she had heard was not true.

“I can’t help it,” replied Mrs. Maddox. “That is what I used to
think――once――that it couldn’t be so. But you do not know that
woman――nor men, either.”

She made the last remark with unconcealed bitterness. I could not help
feeling sorry for her in the misfortune in which her own life with
Maddox had ended. Yet it did not seem right that she should poison all
romance. Still, I reflected, what, after all, did I really know, and
why should I rise to the defense of Shelby? Better, far, that Winifred
should learn now than to learn when it was too late.

“I have been watching her,” pursued Irene. “I found that I could not
trust any man where that woman was concerned. I wish I had never
trusted any.”

“I cannot believe that Shelby would deliberately deceive me,” persisted
Winifred.

Irene Maddox laughed, hollowly. “Yet you know what we discovered
this afternoon,” she pressed. “Why, I cannot even be sure that that
detective, Kennedy, may not be working against me. And as for that
lawyer of my husband’s, Hastings, I don’t know whether I detest him
more than I fear him. Let me warn you to be careful of him, too.
Remember, I have been observing for a long time. I don’t trust him, or
any other lawyer. You never can tell how far they may be concerned in
anything.”

There was a peculiar piquancy to the innuendo. Evidently Irene Maddox
suspected Hastings of much. And again I was forced to ask myself, what
did I really so far know?

I fancied I could detect that the poor woman had reached a point where
she was suspicious of everybody and everything, not an unnatural
situation, I knew, with a woman in her marital predicament.

“What has Mr. Hastings done?” inquired Winifred.

“Done?” repeated Mrs. Maddox. “What has he left undone? Why, he
shielded Marshall in everything, whenever I mentioned to him this
Paquita woman――said it was not his business what his client’s private
life was unless he was directed to interest himself in it by his client
himself. He was merely an attorney, retained for certain specific
purposes. Beyond that he was supposed to know nothing. Oh, my dear, you
have much to learn about the wonderful freemasonry that exists among
men in matters such as this.”

I caught Kennedy’s quizzical smile. We were having a most telling
example of freemasonry among women, into which Irene was initiating a
neophyte. I felt sure that Winifred would be much happier if she had
been left alone, and events might have a chance to explain themselves
without being misinterpreted――a situation from which most of the
troubles both in fact and in fiction arise. In her watching of her
errant husband, Irene had expected every one immediately to fall in
line and aid her――forgetting the very human failing that most people
possess of objecting to play the rôle of informer.

“What fools men are!” soliloquized Irene Maddox a moment later, as
though coming to the point of her previous random remarks. “Just take
that little dancer. What do they see in her? Not brains, surely. As
for me, I don’t think she has even beauty. And yet, look at them! She
has only to appear up there in the Casino at this very moment to be
the most popular person on the floor, while other girls go begging for
partners.”

I could feel Winifred bridling at the challenge in the remark. She
had tasted popularity herself. Was she to admit defeat at the hands
of the little adventuress? Criticize as one might, there was still a
fascination about the mystery of Paquita.

One could feel the coolness that had suddenly risen in the
summer-house――as if a mist from the water had thrown it about. Nor did
the implication of the silence escape Irene Maddox.

“You will pardon me, my dear,” she said, rising. “I know how thankless
such a job is. Perhaps I had better not be seen with you. Yes, I am
sure of it. I think I had better return to the hotel.”

For a moment Winifred hesitated, as if in doubt whether to go, too, or
to stay.

Finally it seemed as if she decided to stay. I do not know which course
would have been better for Winifred――to accompany the elder woman and
imbibe more of the enforced cynicism, or to remain, brooding over the
suspicions which had been injected into her mind. At any rate, Winifred
decided to stay, and made no move either to detain or accompany the
other.

Irene Maddox arose and left Winifred alone. If she had been watching
Paquita there was no further need. Winifred would watch now quite as
closely.

As her footsteps died away, instead of remaining near the dock Kennedy
turned and, keeping back in the shadows where we could not be seen by
the silent watcher in the summer-house, we went down along the shore.

In the shelter of a long line of bath-houses that belonged to the hotel
we paused. There was no one in bathing at this hour, and we sat down
and waited.

“What did you make of that conversation?” I whispered, cautiously,
lowering my voice so that we might not be eavesdropped upon in turn.

“Not strange that Mrs. Maddox hates the little dancer,” replied Craig,
sententiously. “It’s quite evident Riley was right and that Shelby must
be with her. I wonder whether they will return this way or on the land?
It’s worth taking a chance. Let’s stay awhile, anyway.”

He lapsed into silence, as though trying to motivate the actors in the
little drama which was unfolding.

It was not long before, down the beach, we saw a man and a woman coming
toward us rapidly. Kennedy and I drew back farther, and as we did so I
saw that the figure above us in the summer-house had moved away from
the edge so as to be less conspicuous.

The crackle of some dry sea-grass back of the bath-house startled us,
but we did not move. It was one of the Secret Service men. There was no
reason why we should conceal from him that we were on a similar quest.
Yet Kennedy evidently considered it better that nothing should happen
to put any one on guard. We scarcely breathed. He passed, however,
without seeing us, and we flattered ourselves that we were well hidden.

A few minutes later the couple approached. It was unmistakably Shelby
Maddox and Paquita.

“It’s no use,” we heard Shelby say, as they passed directly beside the
bath-houses. “Even down here on the beach they are watching. Still, I
have had a chance to say some of the things I wanted to say. From now
on――we are strangers――you understand?”

It was not said as brutally as it sounds on paper. Rather it gave the
impression, from Shelby’s tone, that they had never been much more.

For a moment Paquita said nothing. Then suddenly she burst forth with a
little bitter laugh.

“It takes two to be strangers. We shall see!”

Without another word she turned, as though in a fit of pique and anger,
and ran up the flight of steps from the bath-houses to the Casino,
passing within five feet of us, without seeing us.

“We shall see,” she muttered under her breath; “we shall see!”

In surprise Shelby took a step or two after her, then paused.

“The deuce take her,” he swore under his breath, then strode on in the
direction of the steps to the dock and the summer-house.

He had scarcely gained the level when the figure in the summer-house
emerged from the gloom.

“Well, Shelby――a tryst with the other charmer, was it?”

“Winifred!”

Miss Walcott laughed sarcastically. “Is that all that your fine
speeches mean, Shelby?” she said, reproachfully. “At the Lodge you
scarcely bow to her; then you meet her secretly on the beach.”

“Winifred――let me explain,” he hastened. “You do not understand. She
is nothing to me――never has been. I am not like Marshall was. When she
came down here the other night she may have thought she could play with
me as she had with him. I met her――as I have scores of others. They
have always been all the same to me――until that night when I met you.
Since then――have I even looked at her――at any one else?”

“Another pretty speech,” cut in Winifred, icily. “But would you have
met her now, if you had known that you would be watched?”

“I should have met her in the lobby of the hotel, if that had been the
only way,” he returned, boldly. “But it was not. I do not understand
the woman. Sometimes I fear that she has fallen in love with me――as
much as her kind can fall in love. I sent for her, yes, myself. I
wanted to tell her bluntly that there could never be anything between
us, that we could not――now――continue even the acquaintance.”

“But you knew her before――in the city, Shelby,” persisted Winifred.
“Besides, was it necessary to take her arm, to talk so earnestly with
her? I saw you when you started.”

“I had to be courteous to her,” defended Shelby, then stopped, as
though realizing too late that it was not defense he should attempt,
but rather confession of something that did not exist and a prayer of
forgiveness for nothing.

“I did not believe what I heard,” said Winifred, coldly. “I was foolish
enough to listen to you, not to others. It is what I see.”

“To others?” he asked, quickly. “Who――what have they told you about me?
Tell me.”

“No――it was in confidence. I cannot tell you who or what. No, not
another word of that. You have opened my eyes yourself. You have only
yourself to thank. Take your little Mexican dancer――let us see what she
does to you!”

Winifred Walcott had moved away toward the steps up to the Casino.

“Please!” implored Shelby. “Why, I sent for her only to tell her that
she must keep away. Winifred!”

Winifred had turned and was running up the steps. Instead of waiting,
as he had done with Paquita, Shelby took the steps two at a time. A
moment later he was by her side.

We could not hear what he said as he reached her, but she took no pains
to modulate her own voice.

“No――no!” she exclaimed, angrily, choking back a sob. “No――leave me.
Don’t speak to me. Take your little dancer, I say!”

A moment later she had come into the circle of light from the Casino.
Pursuit meant only a scene.

At the float at the other end of the pier bobbed one of the tenders of
the _Sybarite_. Shelby turned deliberately and called, and a moment
later his man ran up the dock.

“I’m not going to go out to the yacht to-night,” he ordered. “I shall
sleep at the Lodge. Tell Mito, and come ashore with my things.”

Then he turned, avoiding the Casino, and walked slowly up to the Harbor
House, as we followed at a distance.

I wondered if he might be planning something.




                                  XIII

                          THE SERPENT’S TOOTH


We were approaching the hotel when we met Riley’s operative with whom
we had been talking shortly before. He was looking about as though in
doubt what to do next.

“So you managed to pick them up again on the beach?” greeted Kennedy.

“Yes,” he replied in surprise. “How did you know?”

“We were back of the bath-houses as they came along. You passed within
a few feet of us.”

The detective stared blankly as Kennedy laughed.

“What happened?”

“Nothing very much. I missed them at first, because of the delay of
that fellow Mito. But I reasoned that they must have strolled down the
beach, though I didn’t know how far. I took a chance and made a short
cut overland. Fortunately I caught up with them just as they were
about to turn back. I was a little careful, I suppose――after what
happened.”

He hesitated a bit apologetically, then went on: “I couldn’t hear much
of what they said. Queer fellow, that Shelby. First he sends to meet
the girl, then they quarrel nearly all the time they are together.”

“What did the quarrel seem to be about?” demanded Kennedy. “Couldn’t
you get any of it?”

“Oh yes, I caught enough of it,” returned the operative, confidently.
“I can’t repeat exactly what was said, for it came to me only in
snatches. They seemed to be arguing about something. Once he accused
her of having been the ruin of his brother. She did not answer at
first――just laughed sarcastically. But Shelby wasn’t content with that.
Finally she turned on him.

“‘You say that I ruined Marshall Maddox,’ she cried. ‘His wife says
I ruined him. Oh, Shelby, Shelby, he wasn’t a man who had reached
the age of discretion, I suppose――was he? Oh, it’s always I who do
things――never anybody else.’”

“Yes,” prompted Kennedy. “What else did she say?”

“She was bitter――angry. She stopped short. ‘Shelby Maddox,’ she cried,
‘you had better be careful. There is as much crime and hate and
jealousy in every one of you as there is in Sing Sing. I tell you, be
careful. I haven’t told all I know――yet. But I will say that wherever
your house of hate goes and whomever it touches, it corrupts. Be
careful how you touch me!’ Say, but Paquita was mad! That was when they
turned back. I guess Shelby sort of realized that it was no use. They
turned so suddenly that they almost caught me listening.”

“Anything else?” inquired Kennedy. “What did Shelby have to say about
himself? Do you think he’s tangled up with her in any way?”

“I can’t tell. Most of what they said was spoken so low that it was
impossible for me to hear even a word. I think both of them realized
that they were being watched and listened to. It was only once in a
while when their feelings got the better of them that they raised their
voices, and then they pretty soon caught themselves and remembered.”

“Then it was no lovers’ meeting?” I asked.

“Hardly,” returned the detective, with a growl. “And yet she did not
seem to be half as angry at Shelby as she did at the others. In fact,
I think that a word from him would have smoothed out everything. But
he wouldn’t say it. She tried hard to get him, too. That little dancer
is playing a game――take it from me. And she’s artful, too. I wouldn’t
want to be up against her――no, sir.”

There was something incongruous about the very idea of this bull-necked
flatty and the dainty little adventuress――as though the hippopotamus
might fear the peacock. I would have laughed had the business itself
not been so important. What was her game? In fact, what was Shelby’s
game? Each seemed to be playing a part.

“How about Mito?” I asked. “Have you seen him again since you were
jiu-jitsued?”

The detective shook his head. “No,” he returned, reminiscently. “He
seems to have disappeared altogether. Believe me, I have been keeping
an eye peeled for him. That Jap is a suspicious character. And it’s
just when you can’t put your fingers on him that he is plotting some
deviltry, depend on it.”

We left the Secret Service operative and continued toward the hotel.
In the lobby Kennedy and I looked about eagerly in the hope of finding
Winifred, but she was nowhere to be seen.

Our search was partly rewarded, however. At the end of the porch,
in the shadow, we did find Frances Walcott and Irene Maddox. It was
evident that they had seriously disagreed over something, and it did
not require much guessing to conclude that it had to do with Winifred.
Though Frances Walcott was really a Maddox and Irene Maddox was not,
one would have scarcely guessed it. The stamp of the house of hate was
on both.

Just a fragment of the conversation floated over to us, but it was
enough.

“Very well, then,” exclaimed Mrs. Maddox. “Let them go their own way.
You are like all the rest――you seem to think that a Maddox can do no
wrong. I was only trying to warn Winifred, as I wish some one had
warned me.”

The answer was lost, but Mrs. Walcott’s reply was evidently a sharp
one, for the two parted in unconcealed anger and suspicion. Everywhere
the case seemed to drag its slimy trail over all.

Look about as we might, there was no sign of Paquita. Nor was our
friend Sanchez about, either. We seemed to have lost them, or else,
like Mito, they were under cover.

“I think,” decided Kennedy, “that I’ll just drop into our rooms,
Walter. I haven’t much hope that we’ll find anything yet, but it will
be just as well to be on the watch.”

Accordingly we mounted by a rear staircase to our floor, and for a
moment Kennedy busied himself adjusting the apparatus.

“A bit early, I think,” he remarked, finally. “There are too many
people about to expect anything yet. We may as well go down-stairs
again. Perhaps Burke may return and I’m rather anxious to know what it
is he has been after.”

For a moment, as we retraced our steps down-stairs, I attempted,
briefly, a résumé of the case so far, beginning with the death of
Maddox, and down to the attack on Hastings and then on myself. As I
viewed the chief actors and their motives, I found that they fell into
two groups. By the death of Maddox, Shelby might profit, as might his
sister, Frances. On the other hand were to be considered the motives of
jealousy and revenge, such as might actuate Irene Maddox and Paquita.
Then, too, there was always the possibility of something deeper lying
back of it all, as Burke had hinted――an international complication over
the telautomaton, the wonderful war engine which was soon likely to be
the most valuable piece of property controlled by the family. Into such
calculations even Mito, and perhaps Sanchez, might fit, as indeed might
any of the others.

It was indeed a perplexing case, and I knew that Kennedy himself had
not yet begun to get at the bottom of it, for the simple reason that
when in doubt Kennedy would never talk. His silence was eloquent of
the mystery that shrouded the curious sequence of events. At a loss for
a means by which to piece together the real underlying story, I could
do nothing but follow Kennedy blindly, trusting in his strange ability
to arrive at the truth.

“One thing is certain,” remarked Kennedy, evidently sensing that
I was trying my utmost to arrive at some reasonable explanation
of the events, “and that is that this hotel is a very jungle of
gossip――sharper than a serpent’s tooth. In my opinion, none of us will
be safe until the fangs of this creature, whoever it may be, are drawn.
However, we’ll never arrive anywhere by trying merely to reason it out.
This is a case that needs more facts――facts――facts.”

Following out his own line of thought, Craig decided to return
down-stairs to the seat of operations, perhaps in the hope of running
across Hastings, who might have something to add. Hastings was not
about, either. We were entirely thrown upon our own resources. If we
were ever to discover the truth, we knew that it would be by our own
work, not by the assistance of any of them.

Attempts to locate Hastings quickly demonstrated that we could not
depend on him. Having worked secretly, there seemed to be little else
to do now but to come out into the open and play the game manfully.

“What was the matter?” inquired Riley, as Kennedy and I sauntered into
the lobby of the Harbor House in such a way that we would appear not to
be following anybody.

“Why?” asked Kennedy.

“First it was Paquita,” continued Riley. “She bounced into the hotel,
her face flushed and her eyes flashing. She was as mad as a hornet at
something. Sanchez met her. Why, I thought she’d bite his head off!
And he, poor shrimp, took it as meekly as if he were the rug under her
feet. I don’t know what she said, but she went directly to her room. He
has been about, somewhere. I don’t see him now. I guess he thought she
was too worked up to stay up there. But I haven’t seen her come down.”

“Shelby must have been telling her some plain truth,” said Craig,
laconically.

“Shelby?” echoed Riley. “Why, it wasn’t five minutes afterward that
Winifred Walcott came through, as pale as a ghost. She passed Irene
Maddox, but they scarcely spoke. Looked as if she had been crying.
What’s the matter with them? Are they a bunch of nuts?”

Kennedy smiled. Evidently Riley was unacquainted with the softer side
of life.

“Where’s Shelby?” inquired Craig. “Have you seen him――or Mito?”

“Down in the café, the last I saw him,” replied Riley. “Shelby’s
another nut. You know how much he loves the rest. Well, he came in
all excited, too. And what does he do? Sees Johnson Walcott reading a
paper, grabs him by the arm as though he was a long lost friend, and
drags him down to the café. Say, I’ll be dippy, too, if this keeps on.
They can’t even remember their own feuds!”

Kennedy glanced at me with an amused significance. I gathered that he
meant to hint that Shelby was stopping at nothing to secure the aid of
Johnson Walcott in smoothing affairs over with his sister, Winifred.
Just how Walcott himself would look on such a match I had no idea and
was rather glad when Kennedy suggested that we adjourn to the café
ourselves to look them over.

In a leather-cushioned booth were Shelby and Walcott, Shelby doing most
of the talking, while Walcott listened keenly. We could not very well
deliberately take the next booth, but we did manage to find a corner
where they were not likely to notice us.

We had not been there long before Mito came in, carrying a grip in
which were the clothes and linen his master had ordered ashore. Shelby
directed him where to take the things, and as the Jap stood there I
saw that Walcott was watching him closely. Not once did Mito look at
him, yet one could not help feeling that the Oriental knew that he was
watched and that Walcott was absorbing something from Shelby.

Mito bowed as he received his orders. No sooner had he turned than
I saw Walcott shoot a glance at Shelby. If I had been a lip-reader
I might have been more certain of the words framed by his lips. As
it was, I was ready to swear that Walcott asked, “Do you trust that
fellow?” Shelby’s answer I could not guess, but his face showed no
anxiety, and it seemed as though he passed off the remark lightly.

Though the others had not seen us, Mito spied us with his beady eyes,
though he did not turn his head to do so. At the door he almost ran
into Sanchez, who was engrossed in watching Shelby. Neither said a
word, but the quick scowl of Sanchez spoke a volume. He hated Shelby
and everything pertaining to him.

Whatever it was that Shelby and Walcott were discussing, it was
apparent that Walcott was not at all enthusiastic. He did not betray
any feeling in the matter other than coldness.

“It wouldn’t surprise me if they were discussing Winifred,” concluded
Kennedy. “If that is what it’s about, it doesn’t look as though
Johnson Walcott had any overburdening desire to have Shelby as a
brother-in-law.”

In spite of Walcott’s coldness Shelby continued talking earnestly, but
it seemed to have no effect. Walcott’s reticence seemed to exasperate
Shelby, who with difficulty restrained his own feelings. I fancied
that, had it not been for Winifred, Shelby’s temper would have got the
better of him.

When finally Walcott rose and with a polite excuse started to move
away, it was apparent that Shelby was intensely resentful. However, he
said nothing, nor did he even attempt to follow Walcott out of the café.

“Evidently he has made little progress in patching up the tiff with
Winifred,” concluded Craig, as we, too, rose and sauntered out into the
main part of the hotel.




                                  XIV

                              THE GEOPHONE


We had no more than reached the lobby of the hotel again when we found
Hastings seeking us. Evidently he had sensed that Kennedy was vexed at
him for letting Winifred pass without finding out what was her mission.

“This time, at least, I think I have something to tell you,” he
hastened, drawing us aside.

“What is it about?” encouraged Kennedy, eagerly.

“Paquita,” he replied, scanning our faces. “She has returned to the
hotel.”

Kennedy’s countenance betrayed some disappointment, for we already knew
that.

“I saw Frances and Irene together, too,” went on Hastings.

Again Kennedy could not conceal his disappointment, for it was all an
old story to us. Hastings was not to be gainsaid, however.

“Well, after Frances left Irene Maddox,” he continued, “I saw that she
was wrought up and nervous. So I watched her. She sought out Paquita.”

He drew back, gratified at the flash of interest that Craig instantly
betrayed.

“Indeed?” asked Craig. “What took place?”

“I could not hear it all,” continued the lawyer. “But it seemed as
though Frances was pleading with Paquita for something. I heard the
names of both Shelby and Winifred mentioned. Paquita seemed quite
haughty. Whatever it was that Frances was after, I am quite sure that
she was not successful.”

I could see that Kennedy was actively trying to piece together the
fragmentary information that we had gained during the evening.

What it all meant I could not fathom. But we knew enough to be quite
sure that something important was afoot. First, Shelby had sent for
Paquita and his supposedly secret interview, of which we had learned
enough to know that he had sought to influence the little dancer to let
him alone. The meeting of Winifred and Irene we knew, as well as the
meeting of Irene and Frances. It seemed that Frances Walcott had an
interest in the events much more than we had expected, for, failing to
obtain any satisfaction from Irene, she had even swallowed her pride
and sought out Paquita.

What did it mean? Was Frances really trying to play the match-maker?
Was it for her brother, Shelby, that she showed the concern, or was it
for her sister-in-law, Winifred? There was a positive motive in the
fact that a marriage between the two might more closely protect her own
interests.

“They were talking,” pursued Hastings, “when I saw her husband,
Johnson, coming from the café. I think Paquita must have seen him
first, for she cut the interview short very curtly and left her, though
not before Johnson saw them together. He came over to his wife and I
think he was a trifle angry at what he had seen. At any rate, it seemed
that she was endeavoring to explain something to him and that he did
not in the least approve.”

“Could you hear anything?” queried Kennedy.

“Not a thing, except that there seems to be something about which the
Walcotts do not quite agree.”

I wondered whether Johnson Walcott’s dissatisfaction had been more
at finding his wife talking with Paquita than at the romance between
Shelby and his own sister. In the café he had seemed to be far from
delighted over the affair. Frances, on the other hand, bore every
evidence of wishing to promote the match. It was a strange romance that
we were watching.

“Was there anything else?” asked Kennedy.

“No,” replied Hastings. “They walked away, still talking earnestly, and
I think they have gone to their rooms.”

“Winifred was not about?”

“No. I saw Shelby, finally, though. But he seemed to be preoccupied and
didn’t give me a chance to speak to him.”

“Where is he?”

“In the café, I suppose.”

Riley’s approach at that moment served to introduce a new element into
the situation.

“You saw Mito again?” asked Kennedy.

The Secret Service man nodded. “Saw him take his master’s things into
the café, then to his room. After that he managed to slip away again.
He seems to have something on his mind. I don’t know what it is. We had
a glimpse of Sanchez. He is about, but is keeping very low.”

“What has he been doing?”

“Nothing in the open, as far as I know,” returned Riley. “He may be
planning something. I don’t like him any more than my man likes Mito.
These Japs and wops are deep ones.”

Kennedy smiled, but said nothing. To Riley any foreigner was a
suspicious character, if for no other reason than that he could not
understand him.

“Any word from Mr. Burke?” I reiterated.

Riley nodded. “Yes, he will be here soon, now, I think.”

“Nothing else on Mito or Sanchez?” resumed Kennedy.

Riley negatived. “Trouble with them is they know I’m watching them,” he
explained. “And when a man knows he is being watched it’s easy for him.
There’s only one way to get him and that is to stick so close that it
means a fight. We’ve had one and I hate to take the responsibility of
another without orders from Mr. Burke. Another fight with Mito might
not turn out so luckily, either. Besides, I don’t know that we want
it to come to a fight――yet. Sanchez looks as though he might give an
account of himself. These dark fellows are all knife-men, you know.
I decided that it was best to pick up what we could without making a
scene.”

Kennedy shrugged. There seemed to be nothing to criticize, though it
was a shame that circumstances were such that we were compelled to
be content with fragments at a time when we needed every scrap of
information.

“It’s getting late,” he observed, glancing at his watch. “I think we
might leave the field to Riley to cover, Walter, while we retire to our
rooms. Good night, Mr. Hastings. You’ll tell Mr. Burke to wake us, no
matter what time he comes in?” he added, turning to Riley.

The Secret Service man agreed, and together Kennedy and I went back to
our suite a second time. I was glad enough to go, too, for I wanted to
see what the instrument was which he had installed in the garage.

As we entered, I could not help thinking of Winifred’s action and why
she had cut Shelby off so shortly. Was it a case of intuition, or was
it merely what often passes for intuition――the capacity for making
hasty and incorrect judgments on slender grounds?

What, too, was Mito? Was it he who had committed the murder of Marshall
Maddox? Had he stolen the telautomaton plans? I wondered whether, after
all, he might not be in the service of some foreign government, perhaps
even be a spy.

With scarcely a word, Kennedy had taken his position at the table on
which he had placed the peculiar miniature transmitter, holding it to
his ear and listening intently.

“Is any one talking there?” I asked, supposing that it was some special
form of the detectaphone which he was using.

“I don’t expect that there’ll be any talking,” he replied. “In fact,
there may be only one person, for all I know, and he certainly won’t
talk to himself.”

A knock at our door cut short further inquiry. I opened it cautiously
and was greeted by the cheery voice of Burke, who had come in on the
last train.

“I think I’ve earned a rest to-night,” he remarked, dropping down into
the easiest chair he could find. “I’m tired, but at least I have some
satisfaction for the day’s work.”

“What have you found?” asked Kennedy, eagerly, remembering that Burke
had devoted himself first of all to tracing what had become of the
deadly wireless destroyer itself.

“For one thing,” replied Burke, slowly, “I’m convinced, as far as I can
be regarding something I don’t actually know, that the telautomaton
model is out here at Westport――at least not far away.”

“What makes you think so?” I asked, quickly.

“That clue of the car waiting near the office interests me,” went on
Burke, slowly. “I wasn’t able to get anything out of the rookie on
the beat. But I went on the supposition that somewhere between here
and New York I might find a clue. And I have found several clues from
constables and special officers in towns between Westport and the city.
A car answering the description was seen at several points, and the
time matches up. So I think it is safe to conclude that we are on the
right track. The model is out here――somewhere――I am sure.”

“Have you made any progress in running down your band of foreign
criminals?” asked Kennedy.

“No trace so far,” returned Burke, still cheerfully, “except that it
is entirely likely that Mito, or Paquita, or that fellow Sanchez may
be the outside workers. Of course they would cover up their connection
pretty closely. We can’t expect to beat the most clever minds of the
Continent as easy as we would a gang of sneak-thieves. Riley tells me
you have been in the city most of the day. Have you uncovered anything?”

Briefly Kennedy outlined what had happened, coming down to the events
of the evening down on the beach.

Another knock on the door, and Riley entered.

“You didn’t come down, so I knew that Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Jameson were
awake. You don’t mind my coming in?”

“Not a bit,” returned Kennedy. “We were just going over what I had
gathered to-day. I was telling about that meeting between Frances and
Irene Maddox.”

Riley’s face assumed the same look of perplexity as it had when we
left him, nonplussed by the queer actions of the Maddox family.

“You saw it,” demanded Burke. “What do you make of it?”

“I don’t know,” confessed Riley. “Maybe it means something, maybe not.
I think it does. There’s some kind of difference between those two
women. I can’t make it out. They seemed to be so friendly at first.
Why, they even tell me Mrs. Walcott backed Mrs. Maddox in her fight
with Mr. Maddox over that Paquita. But now it’s different, and it’s
growing worse.”

“Natural enough,” commented Burke. “If Marshall Maddox was separated
from his wife, don’t you see he would have destroyed his will in her
favor. If he was intestate, as it is most likely, then the other
heirs――his brother and sister――stand to gain. There were no children.
Mrs. Maddox has her interest in a third. They can’t take that away
from her. But no doubt it makes her feel as if she had been done out
of something, to see the others get what might have been hers under
different circumstances.”

“That’s it, I guess,” considered Riley. “I’ve heard her say that she
thought now that Paquita was put up to winning Marshall Maddox away
from her, so that the others would benefit.”

“Pretty deep,” pondered Burke, “but not impossible.”

“If she thinks that way,” I interposed, “it might account for her
attitude toward Winifred. She might be just jealous enough not to want
her to come into not only Shelby’s share, but part of the remainder.

“On the other hand,” I reconsidered, remembering my first theory, “Mrs.
Maddox with her third interest is much better off than she was on what
had been allowed her during the life of Marshall Maddox.”

“Shelby Maddox profits by it, any way you look at it,” observed Burke,
following out our general review of possible motives. “Where is he now?”

“Gone up to his room, I suppose,” replied Riley.

“And Mito?”

“In the servants’ quarters――unless he manages to slip out and get into
some more deviltry.”

“Confound it, Riley,” broke in Burke, “you’ve got to trail these people
better! What’s the matter? Haven’t you enough men to――”

“‘Sh!” cautioned Craig from his place at the instrument on the table,
his face showing intense attention to something.

“What’s that?” asked Burke.

Kennedy was busy for the moment and did not answer. But a minute or so
later he replied.

“A geophone, designed originally to record earth tremors, microseisms,
small-amplitude earth shakings. It is really a microphone, the
simplest form of telephone, applied to the earth――hence its name. Any
high-school student in physics could make one. All that is necessary is
to place that simple apparatus, which Mr. Jameson saw, on the ground
anywhere and attach it to a microphone receiver at the other end of the
wire. You can hear an earthquake, or a big gun, or some one walking
about. Hello!――here’s our friend again.”

Craig was again listening intently. What the most sensitive mechanical
eavesdropper could not overhear this little geophone was now
transmitting to him.

“Some one is in that garage,” he reported to us. “Those are footsteps.
Our frame-up is working. He never would have gone there unless he
thought we were not only going to go there to-morrow ourselves, but
were out of sight now, too. By George!――there’s another――there are two
of them!”

I listened a moment myself, with Kennedy. The diaphragm vibrated
terrifically. Then, suddenly, all was still.

What was going on?

Kennedy dropped the receiver on the table regardless of what might
happen to its delicate adjustment, jumped up, and dashed out into the
hall. Down-stairs he went, not waiting for an elevator, for it was only
three flights.

We followed madly, past the amazed night clerk, and out the back door
of the hotel.

As we entered the garage, in the fitful light we could see a dark mass
on the floor. Craig flashed his electric bull’s-eye. In the circle of
light we saw that it was a man. Craig turned the form over.

It was Mito――dead!




                                   XV

                          THE NIGHT OF TERROR


In utter bewilderment we looked at one another. Evidently Mito had
entered, had been surprised by some one, and in a fight had been
overpowered and killed.

Quickly I tried to reason it out. Plainly, even if the Jap had been the
murderer of Marshall Maddox for the plans, he could not have been the
thief of the telautomaton model in New York. Yet he must have known
something about it all. Had we begun to get too close to Mito for some
one’s comfort?

Where was the annihilator which was to revolutionize warfare and
industry? In whose hands were the secrets of the “patent of death”? Who
was the master criminal back of it all?

Mito’s lips were sealed, at least.

It needed only a cursory examination of the body to determine how
he had met his death. His face was drawn, as though he had seen the
blow descending and was powerless to avoid it. On his skull was a
deep gash, made by some heavy implement. The weapon, too, was lying
there――Burke discovered it――a broken leaf of an automobile spring, used
by some one to force tires over rims. There was no art, no science, no
finesse about the murder. It was just plain, brutal force.

If a bomb had been dropped among us, however, we could not have been
more stunned than by the murder of Mito.

Burke and Riley were plainly at a loss, but I did not mind that. It was
the look on Kennedy’s face that worried me. He did not say much, but it
was plain that he was thinking much.

“Just a brutal murder,” he remarked at length, after he had surveyed
the garage and finally come back to Mito himself again. “There doesn’t
seem to be a clue. If it were odd, like the murder of Marshall Maddox,
then there’d be more to work on. But it isn’t. No, it’s the harder
just because of its simplicity. And it puts us just that much further
back, because one whom we thought might lead us to the person higher up
has been removed in the most primitive and, after all, most startling
fashion.”

“I’ll wager that fellow Sanchez could tell something about this if
we could only get at him right,” put in Burke, to whom Kennedy had
delegated the removal of Mito’s body.

Kennedy said nothing, but it surely had begun to look as though he
might be acting for Paquita in some capacity. Was she, in turn, acting
for a desperate band of crooks? I felt that if we could break down
Sanchez we might reach her.

Burke barked his orders to Riley and the rest. “You fellows have been
marking time too long. Get out and find that man Sanchez.”

His men knew better than to question or defend. Action was the only
thing that satisfied Burke. They took the orders on the jump and
hurriedly organized themselves into a searching party, though what it
was that was tangible that they had on Sanchez, supposing that they
got him, it was hard to see. As thoroughly as they could the men under
Burke and Riley covered the hotel, the Casino, the grounds, and finally
turned their attention to the town.

Kennedy and I took up the search together, beginning at the hotel.
Hunting through the corridors and other rooms brought no trace of the
man we sought. He was not registered at the Harbor House, and though
the clerk and some of the attendants knew him, they professed to be
able to tell nothing. Nor was there any trace of Paquita.

Meanwhile Burke and Riley had spread a general alarm through the town,
although I am sure that many of those whom they enlisted as searchers
had not the slightest idea who Sanchez was or even what he looked like.
The search was rapidly resolving itself into an aimless wandering about
in the hope of running across this elusive individual. There seemed to
be no particular way of tracing the man. The farther they got away from
the hotel, however, the more convinced did it seem to make Kennedy to
stick about the Lodge and Casino, if for no other reason than to keep
an eye on any possible moves of the Maddoxes and Walcotts.

We were standing not far from the garage, back of the hotel, when from
a second-story window, around the corner, issued a series of screams
for help in a woman’s voice. We dashed into the hotel, following the
shouts of alarm inside and up-stairs.

“It’s Winifred Walcott’s room,” answered one of the boys as we
breathlessly questioned him.

As we approached the room on the second floor we came upon the maid,
one or two guests, and several servants.

“Miss Winifred――she’s gone, carried off!” blurted out the maid,
catching sight of Kennedy.

She gestured wildly about. The outer sitting-room of the suite was
in great disorder. The window, low and leading out on the roof of
the hotel porch, was wide open. Some chairs were overturned and the
portières between the living-room and the bedroom were torn from their
fastenings, and gone.

“Tell me what happened?” demanded Kennedy.

The maid was almost too excited to talk coherently.

“In the room――Miss Winifred was pacing up and down――nervous――I don’t
know what it was about, sir,” she managed to blurt out. “I was in the
next room, preparing some tea over an electric heater.”

“Yes, yes,” urged Kennedy, impatiently. “But what happened?”

“The window, sir, from the porch roof――opened――a man must have entered.”

“Did you see a man?”

“No, sir, but I heard a scream from Miss Winifred, as though something
had been held over her mouth. No, I didn’t see any one. By the time I
got in here I saw no one.”

Kennedy had stepped over by the door and was examining the torn
hangings, hastily trying to reconstruct what had happened.

“Apparently the intruder, whoever it was, seized her from behind,” he
concluded, hastily, “wrapped the portières over her head, and jerked
her backward. The rush of the abductor must have torn them from their
fastenings. Besides, they were a good muffler for her cries. The
kidnapper must have carried her off, with them wrapped about her head,
to prevent her screams from being heard again.”

He leaped out on the roof and I quickly followed. “It would be quite
possible,” he pointed out, approaching the far end, “at this point for
any one to have gained entrance from the lower porch and to lift a girl
like Winifred down from the roof to the ground.”

The slope of the land at this point was such that the second-floor
level was not many feet above the ground level of the hillside.

I looked at Kennedy, at a loss to know what to do. Almost under our
eyes, while every one was looking for something else, Winifred had been
spirited off. Why――and by whom?

Craig turned to the night clerk, who had been among the first to arrive
and had followed us out on the porch roof.

“Has any one any bloodhounds about here?” he asked, quickly.

“Yes, sir――in the cottage back of the hotel there is a dog-fancier. He
has a couple.”

“You know him?”

“Well.”

“Then you can borrow them?”

“Surely,” returned the clerk.

“Get them,” ordered Kennedy, waving away a group who had come up on the
ground just below us. “And hurry, before the scent gets cold.”

The clerk nodded and disappeared on the run.

Down below the crowd kept collecting.

“Keep them back,” ordered Kennedy, “until the bloodhounds get here.
See――there are marks in the grass that show that some one has been
here――and――look――on this bush a torn corner of the portière.”

A moment later two men from the hotel stables appeared, with the dogs
tugging on leash.

Quickly Kennedy gave them the scent before the trail of the footprints
and the dragging portière had been destroyed by the curious.

They were off, tugging at the leash, Kennedy with one and I with the
other. Burke and Riley had come up by this time, post-haste from their
search for Sanchez, and joined us.

Away across the lawn, through the shrubbery, the trail led us, over a
fence until farther along through a break in the hedge we came upon the
road. Together we four hastened out over the highway.

“There’s one thing in our favor,” panted Kennedy. “No car was used――at
least not yet. And if one or even two are carrying her, we can go a
great deal faster than they can.”

My dog, which seemed to be the more active of the two, was outrunning
the other, and, not through any desire on my part, but through his
sheer tugging at the leash, he kept me a few paces ahead of the rest.

The road which had been taken by the kidnappers bent around the head
of the harbor, branching off at a little country store, closed since
early in the evening. No help was to be expected there, and we followed
the road which ran down through a neck of land that led to the harbor
opposite Westport.

So accustomed had I become to the steady tug of the dog on his leash,
that, as we passed a little brook, where it seemed the abductor had
paused, I was surprised to feel his pull on my hand suddenly relax.

Before I knew it the dog had stopped. He uttered a peculiar
wheeze――half sneeze, half gasp. Before I realized what it could be
about he rolled over, as though he had been shot. It was not that he
had lost the scent. Again and again, as he lay for the few seconds,
gasping, he tried to pick up the trail.

As I watched him in utter astonishment I noticed a peculiar, subtle
odor, with just the faintest suggestion of peach pits.

Kennedy, with more presence of mind than I had shown, drew up sharply
on the leash of his dog, some feet behind me.

“Here, Burke,” he cried. “Hold him――well away. Don’t let him break
loose.”

As Craig advanced toward me he stopped and picked up something that his
foot had kicked in the dust. He advanced, holding away from him what
looked like a small glass vial, while with his other hand he fumbled a
small pocket flashlight.

“Whoever he was,” he exclaimed, excitedly, “the fellow is clever. Read
the label.”

I did and drew back, with a hasty glance at my hound, which already lay
dead at my feet.

The vial was labeled, “PRUSSIC ACID――POISON.”

“Winifred!” I exclaimed, voicing the first fear that flashed through my
mind.

“I think she is all right,” reassured Craig. “If the abductor had
wanted to kill her he would have had plenty of chances before this. No,
I can imagine him stopping a second to wet a handkerchief in the brook
and bind it over his nose as he opened the bottle and smeared the
deadly fluid over the soles of his shoes, casting the empty bottle back
of him. Certainly a clever ruse.”

Together we had retreated from the danger zone toward Burke and Riley,
who were agape with astonishment as they learned of the unheard-of
discovery we had made.

We looked at one another in blank astonishment and fear. Would the
abductor get away, after all?

“A vexatious delay,” interrupted Kennedy, calmly. “But I doubt if they
counted on our having another dog. The stuff must have worn off their
shoes rapidly as they hurried on. Here, Burke, let me have the hound,
now. It may take me some time, but I am sure that I can overcome this
obstacle.”

While we waited, Craig cut a wide circle off the road, with the dog
whining at having lost the scent. For some minutes down the road he let
him run pretty free, trying to pick up the scent again at some point
well past that at which we had found the deadliest of acids, where a
dirt road debouched from the macadam.

“Come on!” he shouted at last, as a deep bay from the dog announced
that he was off again and now running silent, since he had found the
trail.

We made splendid progress now, and, by hasty calculation of the time,
which must have been brief before the alarm was given, we concluded
that we were without a doubt rapidly gaining on the abductor.

It was growing darker and darker as we went out of the lights of
the main road into a deeper recess of the woods. Our little pocket
flashlights were too puny for such work.

Just then along the dirt road back of us came tearing a car. As it
pulled up the driver flashed his spot-light ahead and it cut through
the blackness like a bull’s-eye.

“I heard you had gone this way,” shouted a voice from the darkness.
“Here, let me drive behind and light you ahead.”

In the shaft of light we could see a single figure of a man, staggering
along with some heavy burden in his arms, and behind, several hundred
yards away, Kennedy swiftly following with the hound.

As the light played on them, the figure seemed to realize that escape
was now hopeless, unless he dropped his burden.

He paused just an instant, as though calculating something desperate.
Just then I raised my gun and fired. I had no hope of hitting him in
the fitful light and at the distance. But at least the shot had its
effect.

He dropped Winifred and bolted.

At that moment the car came abreast of me. I turned quickly. The man in
the car with the spot-light was Sanchez!

We had all come up with Kennedy now, the car stopping on the road with
its lights playing full on the group.

Slowly now Winifred, who had fainted, revived. As she opened her eyes
she seemed in a daze. Beyond what we already knew of her exciting
adventure, she could tell nothing. Sanchez offered to drive her back to
the hotel.

It was the first time he had spoken, and I wondered what Burke,
fire-eater that he was, would do.

For a moment he hesitated, then strode up to the sallow-faced man
deliberately.

“This thing has gone too far,” he ground out. “Has all this been staged
so that you could play the hero?”

Sanchez flared. For a moment I thought that there would be a fight. But
he seemed to consider.

With a shrug, he replied, quietly, “I am at your service, if I can be
of assistance to the young lady.”

The man was baffling. There was nothing for Burke to do but to hide his
exasperation and take advantage of the offer.

To me, the sudden appearance of Sanchez was most mystifying. Had he
in reality been on his way to overtake his own agent, when he had,
fortunately for himself, overtaken us? Or were we all wrong and was
Sanchez innocent? No one said a word as we made our quick return to the
hotel.

Winifred was, by this time, herself and able to return to her room,
which was now guarded from below. Neither she nor any of the rest of us
could offer an explanation of the sudden attack or its purpose.

It had been a night of terror and we were about ready to drop from
sheer exhaustion. Besides, it was too late now to do anything more.
Kennedy and I decided to retire, leaving the Secret Service operatives
to watch for any further suspicious move on the part of any one,
especially those who, to all appearances, at least, seemed to be safely
asleep at the Lodge.




                                  XVI

                           THE INVISIBLE INK


We were awakened very early by the violent ringing of our room
telephone. Kennedy was at the receiver almost before I realized what
was going on.

“Have you a machine to follow her?” I heard him ask, hurriedly, then
add: “All right. I’ll leave the trailing to you. Don’t let her get
away. We will go to the city on the train and then you can communicate
with me at Mr. Hastings’s office. I’ll go there.”

“Who was it?” I asked as Craig hung up. “What has happened?”

“Paquita has tried to steal a march on us, I imagine,” he replied,
beginning to dress hastily. “Riley must have been up all night――or
at least very early. He saw her come down-stairs――it’s scarcely
five o’clock now――and a moment later her car pulled up. She’s off,
apparently by the road to New York. It’s strange, too. Except that she
got off so early, she made very little effort at concealment. You
would think she must have known that she would be seen. I wonder if she
wanted us to know it, or was just taking a chance at getting away while
we were napping?”

“Is Riley following her?” I asked.

“Yes. As soon as he saw her speedster at the door he went out by
another door and around to the garage. It just happened that the night
man was there and Riley wheedled him into letting him have a car. It
isn’t as fast as Paquita’s, but then it isn’t always the fast car that
gets away with it between here and New York. Sometimes, if you know how
to drive and where the bad spots in the road are, you can make up what
you lack in speed.”

Kennedy had pulled a time-table out of his pocket and was hurriedly
consulting it.

“The service is very poor at this hour,” he remarked. “It will be an
hour before we can get the next train. We’ve missed the first by a few
minutes.”

“What do you suppose she’s up to now?” I speculated.

Kennedy shrugged silently.

We had finished dressing and for the moment there seemed to be nothing
to do but wait.

“By George!” Craig exclaimed, suddenly, starting for the door. “Just
the chance! Hardly anybody is about. We can get into her room while she
is gone. Come on!”

Paquita’s room, or rather suite, was on the floor above and in a tower
at the corner. It was difficult to get into, but from a porch at the
end of the hall we found that it was possible to step on a ledge
and, at some risk, reach one window. Kennedy did not hesitate, and I
followed.

As was to be supposed, the room was topsy-turvy, showing that she had
been at some pains to get away early and quick.

We began a systematic search, pawing with unhallowed fingers all the
dainty articles of feminine finery which might conceal some bit of
evidence that might assist us.

“Pretty clever,” scowled Kennedy, as drawer after drawer, trunk after
trunk, closet after closet, yielded nothing. “She must have destroyed
everything.”

He paused by a dainty little wicker writing-desk, which was
scrupulously clean. Even the blotters were clean, as though she had
feared some one might, by taking her hand-mirror, even read what she
blotted.

The scrap-basket had a pile of waste in it, including a couple of
evening papers. However, I turned it over and examined it while Craig
watched.

As I did so I fairly pounced on a sheet of paper crumpled into a ball,
and eagerly straightened it out flat on the table.

“Humph!” I ejaculated in disgust. “Blank! Might have known she wouldn’t
leave anything in writing around, I suppose.”

I was about to throw it back when Kennedy took it from me. He held it
up to the light. It was still just a crumpled sheet of white paper. He
looked about. On a dressing-table stood an electric curling-iron. He
heated it and passed it over the paper until it curled with the heat.
Still it was just a blank sheet of paper.

Was he pursuing a will-o’-the-wisp?

For a moment he regarded it thoughtfully. “If I were in the
laboratory,” he ruminated, “I could tell pretty quick whether――
Wait!――that’s foolish. She hasn’t any laboratory here. Walter, fill
that basin with warm water.”

In the bottom of the basin Craig laid the sheet of paper and we bent
over it.

“Nothing doing,” I remarked, disappointed.

“Why not?” he returned, eagerly, turning the wet paper. “We had it
wrong side up!”

There, before our eyes, under the water, characters of some sort were
appearing.

“You can make a perfectly good sympathetic ink from linseed oil, liquor
of ammonia, and any of several other ingredients,” he said, watching
with me. “When writing with it dries it is invisible. Only water will
bring it out. Then when it dries it is invisible again. Look.”

I did, but could not yet make out what it was, except that it seemed to
be a hodge-podge of figures:

               251533331514543245434412152515354433331552

               543442254533442431521521243324432323154215

“It’s a cipher!” I exclaimed with that usual acumen that made Kennedy
smile indulgently.

“Quite right,” he agreed, studying the peculiar scrawl of the figures.
“But if we are going to get to New York at anything like the time she
does, we must get that train. I can’t stop to decipher it now. We’ll
have plenty of time later in the morning. There’s no use staying here,
with the bird flown from the cage. I wonder whether Hastings is up yet.”

The lawyer, who was not as young as he used to be, was not awake, and
it took some pounding on his door to wake him. As he opened it sleepily
he was prepared to give some one a piece of his mind, until he saw that
it was Kennedy and myself.

“Hello!” he suppressed a surly growl. “What’s the trouble?”

Quickly Craig told him of the strange departure of Paquita.

“Up to something again,” muttered Hastings, finding some one at least
on whom he could vent his spleen, although by this time he was fully
awake. “But, man, I can’t get away for that early train!”

“Oh, that’s all right,” reassured Kennedy. “I think it will be enough
if you come down on the express. But I wanted to tell you that when
Riley called up and said he was off after Paquita, I couldn’t think of
a place in the city that was more central than your office and I took
the liberty of telling him to call me up there, without thinking how
early it would be.”

“I’ll let you have the key,” returned Hastings, taking one from a ring.
“I’ll join you as soon as I can get away.”

“Just what I wanted,” commented Kennedy, as we left the lawyer and
hurried down to the dining-room for the few remaining minutes before
the hotel ’bus left for the station. “Besides, I wanted to get there
when no one was around, so that I could have a chance to look at that
confounded detectaphone again. Whoever it was who installed it was
clever.”

“Might not that be the purpose of Paquita’s trip to New York?” I
queried.

“I was thinking of that. Between us, Riley and ourselves ought to be
able to find that out.”

There was just time for a hasty bite of breakfast and we went into the
dining-room, where Burke was evidently looking for us, for he came over
and sat down. No one else was about and he felt free to talk.

“If you’re going,” he decided, after telling us of Riley’s report to
him also of Paquita, “I think I had better stay. We ought not to let
any of them remain here unobserved――not after last night,” he added.

“Quite right,” agreed Kennedy. “Have you heard anything more about the
attack on Winifred?”

Burke negatived. He was still sore at Sanchez, who seemed to have come
out of the affair with credit. I fancied that if ever the sallow-faced
man ran afoul of Burke it would go hard with him.

“I didn’t get that business straight last night,” mused the detective.
“Why should any one have wanted to kidnap Winifred? It couldn’t have
been to hurt her――for there was plenty of opportunity to do that.
It must have been to hold her somewhere and force some one to do
something. What do you think of that, Kennedy?”

“Your reasoning is very logical,” agreed Craig.

“There is only one thing missing――who was it and what was it for?”

“Pretty large questions,” agreed Burke, good-humoredly now. “There must
have been some big reason for it. Well, I hope this trip of Paquita’s
proves to be the key to something. I almost wish I had told Riley to
stay. I’d like to go with you.”

“No,” reassured Craig. “It’s better that you should be here. We must
not leave any loopholes. You’ll communicate with me if anything
happens?”

Burke nodded and glanced hastily at his watch as a hint to us to hurry.
With a parting assurance from him, we made the dash for the train in
the hotel ’bus.

The crisp morning air as we spun up to the station was a tonic to
Kennedy. He seemed to enjoy the excitement of the chase keenly and I
must admit that I, too, felt the pleasing uncertainty of our errand.

I had found by this time that there was an entirely different crowd
that regularly took each train. None of those whom we had seen the
previous day on the express were on this train, although I felt sure
that some of them at least would take their regular trip to the city
later, especially Shelby. Whatever happened, at least we were ahead of
them, although I doubted whether we would be ahead of Paquita unless
she had some trouble on the road.

Nothing was to be gained by the study of the other passengers, and
there was not even a chair car on the accommodation. The papers had not
arrived from New York in spite of the fact that Westport was not very
far out, and the time consumed in stopping at every station on the road
seemed to hang heavy.

Kennedy, however, was never at a loss for something to do. We had no
more than settled ourselves in the smoker with its seats of hot, dirty,
worn, antiquated railroad plush, when he pulled from his pocket a copy
he had made of the figures that had appeared on the wet paper.

In a moment he was deeply engaged in a study of them, trying all manner
of tricks, combining them, adding them, setting figures opposite the
letters of the alphabet, everything that could occur to him on the spur
of the moment, although I knew that he had worked out a scientific
manner of reading any cipher. Still, his system of deciphering would
take time, and in the brief interval of the railroad journey it was
his intention to see whether he might not save the labor and perhaps
stumble on some simple key.

Evidently the cipher was not so simple. One after another he used
up sheets from his loose-leaf note-book, tearing up the scrawls
and throwing them out of the window, but never seeming to become
discouraged or to lose his temper at each fresh failure.

“I can’t say I’m making much progress,” he admitted, finally, closing
his note-book and taking from his wallet carefully the original
crumpled sheet I had found in the scrap-basket. “There’s just one
thing I’d like to try――not to decipher it, for that will take time, I
see――but to see if there is anything else that I missed as I looked at
it so hastily up there in that room.”

At the ice-water cooler, which never had any ice in it, nor cups about
it, he held the sheet of paper for a moment under the tepid running
water. Since he had first wet it, it had dried out and the figures were
again invisible. Then he returned to our seat and soon was deep in the
study of the original this time.

“I can say one thing,” he remarked, folding the cipher carefully
so as not to tear the weakened fibers, as we rolled into the New
York terminus, “the person who wrote that thing is a crook――has the
instincts of a spy and traitor.”

“How do you know that?” I inquired.

“How?” he repeated, quietly, glancing up sharply from a final look at
the thing. “Did you ever hear of the science of graphology――the study
of character in handwriting? Much the same thing applies to figures.
It’s all there in the way those figures are made, just as plain as the
nose on your face, even if the meaning of the cipher is still hidden.
We have a crook to deal with, and a very clever one, too, even if we
don’t know yet who it is. It’s possible to hide a good deal, but not
everything――not everything.”

From the station Kennedy and I went immediately down to the office
of Hastings. It was still very early and few offices were occupied.
Kennedy opened the door and, as I anticipated, went directly to the
spot in the office where he had unearthed, or rather unwalled, the
detectaphone transmitter.

There was not a chance that any one would be listening at the other
end, yet he proceeded cautiously. The transmitter had been placed close
to the plaster which had not been disturbed in Hastings’s office. So
efficient was the little machine that even the plaster did not prevent
sound waves from affecting its sensitive diaphragm.

“But how could it have been put in place?” I asked as Kennedy explored
the hole he had made in the wall.

“That’s new plaster back there,” he pointed out, peering in. “Some
one must have had access on a pretense to the next office and placed
the transmitter that way, plastering up the wall again and painting it
over. You see, Hastings wouldn’t know about that.”

“Still,” I objected, “any one going in and out of the next office would
be likely to be seen. Who has the office?”

“It’s no use to look,” replied Kennedy, as I started for the hall.
“They are as ignorant as we are. See――the wire doesn’t go there. It
goes horizontally to that box or casing in the corner which carries
steam-pipes. Then it goes down. It’s not likely it goes down very many
floors. Let’s see what’s under us.”

The office beneath bore on its doors the name of a well-known
brokerage firm. There was no reason to suspect them, and Kennedy and I
walked down another floor. There, in a little office, directly under
that occupied by Hastings, gilt letters announced simply “Public
Stenographer Exchange.” Without a doubt that was the other end of the
eavesdropper.

“There’s no one in yet, sir,” informed a cleaning woman who happened to
see us trying the door.

Kennedy was ready with a story. “That’s too bad,” he hastened, with a
glance at his watch. “They want to sublet it to me and I’d like to
look at it before I decide on another office at nine o’clock.”

“I can let you see it,” hinted the woman, rattling a string of keys.

“Can you?” encouraged Kennedy, slipping a silver coin into her hand.
“Thank you. It will save me another trip.”

She opened the door and we saw at once why Kennedy’s chance story had
seemed so plausible. Whatever furniture had been there had been moved
out, except a single plain chair and a very small table. But on the
table stood a box, the receiving end of the detectaphone. It was the
eavesdropper’s station, all right.

The woman left us a moment and we made the best of the opportunity. Not
even a scrap of paper had been left. Except for what greeted us on our
first entrance, there was nothing.

Who had rented the place? Who had listened in, had heard and
anticipated even our careful frame-up?

Could it have been that this was the objective of the hasty visit of
Paquita, that it had been she who was so eager to destroy the evidence
of the eavesdropping on Hastings?

It was galling to have to stand here in inaction at a time when we felt
that we might be learning much if we had only so much as a hint where
else to look.

“The easiest way of finding out is to watch,” concluded Kennedy.
“We can’t just stand about in the hall. That in itself will look
suspicious. You wait here a few minutes while I see if I can find the
agent of the building.”

Around a bend in the hall I waited, trying to seem interested more in
some other office down the hall. No one appeared, however, looking
for any of the offices, and it was only a few minutes before Kennedy
returned.

“I found him,” he announced. “Of course he could tell me next to
nothing. It was as I had supposed, just some one who was an emissary of
our criminal. I doubt if it would do us much good to catch the person
now, anyway. Still, it’s worth while taking a chance on. A girl who
said she was a typewriter and stenographer hired the place, and paid
for it in cash in advance. I managed to persuade the agent to let me
have the key to this vacant office opposite. We can watch better from
that.”

We let ourselves into the opposite office, which was bare, and I could
see that I was in for a tiresome wait.

No one had arrived yet in Hastings’s office and Kennedy was eager to
receive some word from Riley as well as watch the eavesdropping plant.
Accordingly, he left me to watch while he returned to the lawyer’s
office.

Every footfall in the hall raised my hopes, only to dash them again as
the new-comer entered some other office than the one I was watching.




                                  XVII

                           THE CIPHER LETTER


Irksome though it was to be compelled to do fruitless watching in a
vacant office, there was nothing to do but stick at it. What Paquita
might be up to was a mystery, but I knew that until we heard from Riley
we could have only the most slender chance to locate her in the big
city.

It was perhaps half an hour later when, to my relief, Kennedy returned,
bringing with him a strange man. I looked at him inquiringly.

“You’re just wasting time here, Walter,” Craig explained. “I’ve got one
of the Secret Service men here in the city to relieve you of your job.
But I very much suspect that, after what happened last night, whoever
had that place across the hall is through and would rather lose the
detectaphone receiver than risk being caught.”

“Have you had any word from Riley?”

“Not a word. I’m getting anxious,” he replied, turning to the new man
and instructing him what to do.

Kennedy was eager to get back, in case there might be a hasty call
about Paquita. I could see, too, that he was convinced that we were
baffled, at least as far as discovering who had been using the
detectaphone was concerned.

We returned quickly to Hastings’s office, which was still deserted,
and there, as we waited nervously, Kennedy drew forth the cipher and
began to study it again, but this time on an entirely different line,
following his own scientific principles, which he had laid down after
investigating the work of other expert decipherers.

My hopes rose momentarily when we heard footsteps in the hall and the
door was burst open. It was, however, merely a messenger-boy.

“Telegram for Mr. Kennedy,” he shouted, penetrating even the sacred
inner office of Hastings.

Craig tore open the yellow envelope, read the message, and tossed it
over to me. It was from Burke at Westport.

“Wireless operators at Seaville Station,” it read, “report strange
interference. May be in reference to telautomaton. Will keep you
advised if anything happens.”

The possibility of a new twist to events was very fascinating, though
I did not understand it. I was just about to question Kennedy about
the telautomaton when the door opened again. This time it was Hastings
himself.

“Has there been any word?” he asked, eagerly.

“Nothing so far,” replied Craig. “You came on the express, I suppose?”

“Yes,” he replied, his face wearing a puzzled expression. “I don’t
quite understand what is going on.”

“What in particular?” queried Craig, seeing that there was something on
Hastings’s mind.

“Why, Shelby, of course,” he answered. “Some change has taken place
in him. He’s not like the Shelby I used to know. Yesterday he came
in to town. He was on the train again to-day. I wasn’t the only one
who noticed it. Johnson Walcott was on the train, too. He noticed
it――called my attention to it, as a matter of fact. I saw some of the
younger men, too. Shelby as a regular commuter is a joke to them.
But it’s more than a joke, I’m thinking. Shelby never came near Wall
Street――or Broad Street――before. But now they tell me he seems to be
taking an active interest in the Maddox Munitions stock on the curb. I
don’t understand it.”

“Could he be trying to put through some deal?” I inquired, hastily.
“Perhaps he’s trying to get the control his brother would have had.”

“I don’t doubt that he has some such scheme,” agreed Hastings.
“But――well, what do you say, Kennedy? Doesn’t it look suspicious, so
soon afterward? It may be real ambition, now. He may have changed.
But――”

Hastings’s “but” meant volumes.

Just then the telephone rang and the lawyer answered it, handing the
instrument over to Kennedy.

We listened eagerly. It was the first long-delayed report of Paquita
from Riley, and as Kennedy pursued the one-sided conversation that we
heard I gathered that, far from clearing up things, the actions of
Paquita had further muddled them.

Hastings glanced at me and shook his head sagely, whispering, “That’s a
clever and a dangerous woman: When she looks most innocent is the time
to be wary.”

I tried to pay no attention to his banal remarks, but still was unable
to follow, from what I heard, the course of the report from Riley.

Finally it seemed as if Kennedy were cut off in the middle of a remark
or that Riley had hung up suddenly. Kennedy jiggled the hook but was
unable to get any one back again, though Central tried for some time.

“What was it?” I asked, keenly interested.

“I’m afraid she’s putting one over on us again,” commented Kennedy as
he hung up the receiver.

“How’s that?” I asked.

“Why, it’s evidently a purposeless visit to the city, as nearly as I
can make out. Riley followed her in――had no difficulty. In fact, he
thinks that she knew she was being followed before they reached the
turnpike from Westport.”

“Where did she go after she got here?” I asked, hoping that at
last there was some clue that might lead to the “gang” which Burke
suspected, but which I was almost tempted to believe was mythical.

“Just stopped at her city apartment,” returned Craig. “There wasn’t any
telephone handy and Riley was afraid to leave her for fear she might
come out and get away before he could get back. It was very early. When
it came time for the offices to open she made a call at her theatrical
agents again. After that she came down-town. She wasn’t far away from
us here. This will interest you, Mr. Hastings.”

Hastings needed no prompting. He was already interested.

“Riley found her talking to a clerk in a brokerage house――Dexter & Co.
You know them?”

“Slightly. I wonder what that can mean.”

“Perhaps something to do with Shelby――at least Riley thinks so. It
was while she was talking to the clerk that he got his first chance
to telephone me. What cut him short was that he could see from the
telephone booth that she was starting away. He had to go, but he did
get time to say that he had just seen Shelby Maddox enter the same
building, though Shelby didn’t see Paquita.”

“Did she see him?”

“I suppose so. That must have been why she went away so quickly. I
suppose she didn’t want to be seen.”

“What can that girl be up to now?” considered Hastings. “You may just
rest assured that it is something devilish.”

“Any word from Sanchez?” I asked, remembering my own experience the
time I had tried to trail Paquita.

“Nothing so far,” replied Kennedy. “Riley was looking for him, but
hasn’t seen a trace of him. Except for the visit down-town, Paquita
seems to be just going about as though giving Riley something to do. He
thinks it’s mighty strange she doesn’t try to throw him off. Really,
she seems to want to be shadowed.”

“How can that be?”

Kennedy shrugged. “I don’t know. Riley promised to call up the next
chance he got.”

“Why not go over to Dexter’s?” suggested Hastings.

“She can’t be there,” returned Kennedy. “If she was, Riley would have
had a chance to make a second call. Therefore I reason that she must
have gone away after she had seen the clerk and when Shelby appeared. I
think I’ll stay here awhile, until I hear again――especially as I have
nowhere else to go,” he decided, pulling out the cipher from his pocket
again. “We may hear some more about Shelby and his schemes.”

Kennedy had now fallen into an earnest study of the peculiar cryptogram
which we had discovered.

“I suppose you’ve noticed that there’s no figure above five in it,” he
remarked to me, looking up for an instant from several sheets of paper
which he was covering with a hopeless jam of figures and letters.

“I had not,” I confessed. “What of it?”

“Well, I’ve tried the numbers in all sorts of combinations and
permutations. They don’t work. Let me see. Suppose we take them in
pairs.”

For several moments he continued to figure and his face became
continuously brighter.

“There are six pairs of 33’s,” he remarked, almost to himself. “Now,
it’s well known that the letter ‘e’ is the most commonly used letter.
That’s the starting point usually in working out a cipher. Wait――there
are eight ‘15’s’――that must be ‘e.’ Yes, the chances are all for it.
Now what letter is 33, if any?”

He appeared to be in a dream as he recalled from his studies of
cryptograms what were the probabilities of the occurrence of the
particular letters. Suddenly he exclaimed:

“Perhaps it’s ‘n’――let’s see.”

Hastily he wrote down some letters and numbers in the following
order――“25enne1454.”

He looked at it for a moment, and then his face registered the dawn of
an idea.

“By George!” he exclaimed, “we don’t have to go any further! I have it.
It’s my own name――Kennedy. Let me see how that works. I believe it’s
the system we call――”

Kennedy was again interrupted by the entrance of the messenger-boy with
another telegram. He tore it open and, as I expected, it was a second
message from Burke.

“Seaville Station has reported interference to Government. Just
received orders Washington to take up investigation. Not wireless
messages that interfere. Some mystery. When can you come out?”

Kennedy read and reread the message. To neither Hastings nor myself
did it convey any idea upon which we could build. But to Kennedy,
seemingly, it suggested a thousand and one things.

It was evident that the appeal from Burke had moved Kennedy very much.
Paquita had lured us into town, but I cannot say that it was giving us
much to show for our pains.

“What do you suppose that message can mean?” I questioned. “What does
Burke mean about the telautomaton?”

“I can’t say at this distance. There must be more to it than he has
put into the telegram. But at least it is possible that the men at the
station have stumbled over some attempt to use the wireless in testing
out the little model. It’s pretty hard to tell. Really, I wish I was
out there. A clue like this interests me much more than our little
adventuress.”

Kennedy had scarcely laid down the message from Burke when the
telephone tinkled again. He seized the receiver expectantly. By his
excitement I could see that it was Riley again.

“Yes, Riley,” we heard him answer. “Where are you now?”

The conversation was rapid-fire. As Kennedy hung up his face showed
considerable interest.

“That woman is just making sport of Riley,” exclaimed Kennedy, hotly,
facing us in perplexity.

“Why, what is she doing?”

“Seems to be aimlessly driving about the city. I’ll bet she is just
laughing at him. I wonder what the game may be?”

“Where is she now?”

“Up-town again. I suppose that we could jump up there and probably
catch Riley somewhere, by keeping in touch with this office, if both
of us kept calling up here. But what good it would do I can’t see. I’m
disappointed. This thing has degenerated into a wild-goose chase.”

His eye fell on the telegram from Burke, and I knew that the two things
had placed Kennedy in a dilemma. If he might have been in two places at
once, he would have been satisfied. Should he drop everything and go to
Burke or should he wait for Riley?

“We’ll let the cipher decide,” concluded Kennedy, turning to the
scribbled papers before him.

“What is the cipher system?” I asked, mechanically, my head rather in a
whirl at the fast-crowding events.

“Don’t you understand?” he cried, almost gleefully, working at the
solution of the secret writing. “I’ve got it! How stupid of me before
not to think of it. Why, it’s the old checkerboard cipher again!”

Quickly he drew on paper a series of five squares horizontally and five
vertically and filled them in with the letters of the alphabet, placing
I and J in the same square, thus using twenty-five squares. Over the
top he wrote the numbers to 5 and down the side he did the same, as
follows:

                            1   2   3   4   5
                          ――――――――――――――――――――-
                        1 | A | B | C | D | E |
                          ――――――――――――――――――――-
                        2 | F | G | H | IJ| K |
                          ――――――――――――――――――――-
                        3 | L | M | N | O | P |
                          ――――――――――――――――――――-
                        4 | Q | R | S | T | U |
                          ――――――――――――――――――――-
                        5 | V | W | X | Y | Z |
                          ――――――――――――――――――――-

“Do you see?” he cried, eagerly. “The letter ‘e’ is in the first row,
the fifth letter――15. The letter ‘n’ is the third letter in the third
row――33. Why, it’s simple!”

It might have been simple to him now, but to Hastings and myself, as
Kennedy figured the thing out, it was little short of marvelous. For
all we could have done it, I suppose the blank scrap of paper would
still have been a hidden book.

We were crowded about Kennedy, eagerly watching what his deciphering
might yield, when the office-boy announced, “Mr. Shelby Maddox to see
you, Mr. Hastings.”

Kennedy quickly covered the papers on which he was writing with some
others on the desk, just as Shelby entered.

“Is Kennedy here?” cried Shelby. “Oh――I thought maybe you might be.
They told me that you’d gone early to the city.”

Our greeting was none too cordial, but Shelby either did not notice it
or affected not to do so.

“I wanted to ask you about that kidnapping,” he explained. “You see,
I wasn’t about when they found Mito, and it wasn’t until later that
I heard of it and the attempt on Winifred. What do you suppose, Mr.
Kennedy, was the reason? Who could have wanted to carry her off?”

Kennedy shrugged. “So far I haven’t been able to give a final
explanation,” he remarked, keenly.

“Then the kidnappers got away clean?” asked Shelby.

“It was very clever,” temporized Kennedy, “but I would hardly say that
there is no clue.”

Shelby eyed Craig keenly, as though he would have liked to read his
mind. But Kennedy’s face did not betray whether it was much or little
that he knew.

“Well,” added Shelby, “all I’ve got to say is that some one is going to
get into trouble if anything happens to that girl.”

I was listening attentively. Was this a bluff, or not? From the
expression on Hastings’s face one would have said that he was convinced
it must have been Shelby himself who kidnapped her. I wondered whether
it was wholly interest in Winifred that prompted Shelby’s visit and
inquiry.

“At any rate,” he went on, “you’ll all be watching now against a
repetition of such a thing, won’t you? I don’t need to remind you,
Kennedy, of your promise when I talked to you before?”

Craig nodded. “I’ll give you a square deal, Mr. Maddox,” returned
Craig. “Of course I can’t work for two people at once. But I shall do
nothing for any client that I am not convinced is perfectly right. You
need not fear for Miss Walcott as long as I can protect her.”

Maddox seemed to be relieved, although he had found nothing that
pointed to the origin of the attack. Or was it because of that?

He glanced at his watch uneasily. “You’ll pardon me,” he said, rising.
“I had a few minutes and I thought I’d drop in and see you. I must
keep an appointment. Thank you for what you have said about Winifred.”

As he withdrew I shot a hasty glance at Craig. Should I follow him?
Kennedy negatived.

Apparently not even the intrusion of Shelby had got out of his mind
either the dilemma we were in or the hidden message that he seemed on
the point of reading.

“An engagement,” commented Hastings, incredulously. “Since when has
Shelby had important engagements? More than likely it is something to
do with this Paquita woman.”

There was no mistaking the opinion that Hastings had of the youngest
scion of the house of Maddox. Nor was it unjustified. Shelby’s
escapades had been notorious, though I had always noticed that, in the
aftermath of the stories, Shelby was quite as much, if not more, sinned
against than sinning. Young men of his stamp are subject to many more
temptations than some of the rest of us. If Shelby were coming through
all right, I reflected, so much the greater credit for him.

Kennedy either shared my own feelings toward Shelby or had decided that
he was not at present worth considering to the delay of something more
important.

I looked over his shoulder, fascinated, as he fell to work again
immediately on the cipher with the same zest which he had displayed
before Shelby’s interruption.

Rapidly Kennedy translated the figures into letters and, as each word
was set down on paper, became more and more excited.

Finally he leaped up and seized his hat.

“Confound her!” he exclaimed, “that explains it all! Look!”

Hastings and I read what he had written:

“KENNEDY MUST BE KEPT IN NEW YORK UNTIL WE FINISH HERE.”




                                 XVIII

                          THE RADIO DETECTIVE


Here, it seemed, was a new danger. Was it to be taken as a proof of
Burke’s theory that some one, perhaps a gang, was back of Paquita! I
was almost inclined to Hastings’ opinion, for the moment. What was the
reason that Shelby had been so interested in Kennedy as to seek him out
even in the office of the lawyer of his brother who hated him?

I could evolve no answer in my own inner consciousness for the
questions. As far as I could see we were still fighting in the dark,
and fighting an unknown.

Kennedy quickly chose one horn of the dilemma that had been presented
to him. Both the wording of the cipher and Burke’s enigmatic message
regarding the wireless which came so close on its heels quite decided
him to hurry back to Westport――that is, if one might so call traveling
on midday trains that lounged along from station to station.

We left Hastings in a high state of excitement. Some pressing business
prevented his immediate return to Westport, and Kennedy was evidently
rather pleased than otherwise, for he did not urge him to go.

“There’s just one thing that I must stop for, and we shall have
plenty of time, if we don’t waste it,” he planned. “I must go to the
laboratory. There’s some stuff there I want to take out if, as I
foresee, we are to have to deal with wireless in some way. Besides, I
may need some expert assistance and I want to arrange with one of the
graduate students at the university, if I can.”

In the laboratory he found what he wanted and began gathering it into
bundles, packing up some head telephone receivers, coils of wire, and
other apparatus, some of which was very cumbersome. The last he placed
in a pile by itself.

The door opened and a young man entered.

“Oh, Watkins,” Craig directed, as I recognized one of the students who
had attended his courses, “there’s a lot of apparatus I would like you
to take out to Westport for me.”

They talked briefly in a wireless jargon which I did not understand,
and the student agreed to carry the stuff out on a late train, meeting
us at the Harbor House. At the last moment Kennedy was off for the
railroad station. It was making close connections, but we succeeded.

The ride out was nerve-racking to us under the circumstances. We had
taken the bait so temptingly displayed by Paquita and had gone to New
York. Now we could not get back fast enough. We had not been in the
city long, it is true. But had it been too long? What had happened out
in the town we were anxious to learn. I felt sure that in our absence
some of the Maddoxes might well have attempted something which our
presence would have restrained.

Burke met us at the station with a car, so sure was he that Kennedy
would return immediately on receipt of his second message, and it was
evident that he felt a great sense of relief at regaining Kennedy’s
help.

As we spun along down from the station Kennedy hastened to tell Burke
what had happened, first about Paquita as Riley had reported, then his
deciphering of the cipher message, our failure to discover anything
in the scantily furnished office at the other end of the detectaphone
wire, Shelby’s visit, and the whole peculiar train of circumstances.

Instead of going directly to the Harbor House Burke drove us around by
the hotel dock, where we saw that there was a stranger in a power boat
apparently waiting for him.

Kennedy was just finishing his recital of our unsatisfactory experience
as we approached.

“Perhaps it all has something to do with what I wired you about,”
returned Burke, thoughtfully. “This new affair is something that I
know you’ll be interested in. You see, among my other jobs for the
Government I’m what you might call a radio-detective, I guess. You know
that there are laws aimed against these amateur wireless operators, I
suppose?”

Kennedy nodded, and Burke went on, “Well, whenever regular operators
find anything illegal going on in the air, they notify the Government,
and so the thing is passed along for me to take up. Heaven knows I
don’t know much about wireless. But that doesn’t matter. They don’t
want a wireless man so much as they do a detective to ferret out from
the operator’s evidence who can be violating the law of the air, and
where. So that is how I happened to get hold of this evidence which, I
think, may prove valuable to us.”

As we pulled up near the hotel dock Burke beckoned to the strange man
who had been waiting for him.

“Let me introduce you to Steel, whom they have sent to me on that
matter I told you about.”

Kennedy and I shook hands with the man, who glanced out over the
harbor as he explained briefly, “I’m an operator over there at the
Seaville Station, which you can see on the point.”

We also gazed out over the water. The powerful station which he
indicated was on a spit of sand perhaps two miles distant and stood out
sharply against the horizon, with its tall steel masts and cluster of
little houses below, in which the operators and the plant were.

“It’s a wonderful station,” Steel remarked, noticing that we were
looking at it also. “We’d be glad to have you over there, Mr. Kennedy.
Perhaps you could help us.”

“How’s that?” asked Craig, keenly.

“Why,” explained the operator, with a sort of reflective growl,
“for the past day or so, now and then, when we least expect it, our
apparatus has been put out of business. It’s only temporary. But it
looks as though there was too much interference. It isn’t static. It’s
almost as though some one was jamming the air. And we don’t know of any
one around here that’s capable of doing it. None of us can explain it,
but there are some powerful impulses in the air. I can’t make it out.”

Kennedy’s eye rested on the graceful white hull of the _Sybarite_
as she lay still at anchor off the Harbor House. I had not noticed,
although Kennedy had, that the yacht was equipped with wireless.

“It’s not likely that it is any one on the _Sybarite_ who is
responsible?” he considered, tentatively.

The operator shook his head. “No, the apparatus isn’t strong enough. We
would be more likely to put them out of business.”

Burke turned the car around and drove up to the Harbor House. Kennedy
jumped out of the car and carried part of the stuff he had brought from
the laboratory, while I took the rest, followed by Burke and Steel.

“When I got your message, Burke,” he said, “I thought that there might
be something going on such as you’ve told me. So I came out prepared.
I’ve got some more apparatus coming, too, in case we don’t get what we
want with this. Will you see if we can get permission to go up on the
roof――and do it without attracting attention, too?”

Burke quickly made the arrangements and we quietly went up-stairs by a
back way, finally coming out on a flat portion of the Lodge roof.

From one of the packages Kennedy took some wire and hastily and
ingeniously strung it so that in a short time it was quite evident
that he was improvising the aerial of a wireless outfit of some sort.
Finally, when he had finished, he led the proper wires down over the
edge of the roof.

“One of these,” he said, preparing to leave the roof, “I want to carry
down to the ground, the other to our own room.”

We went down again by the back stairs and outside, where Kennedy picked
up the wire that hung down to the earth.

Having completed this part of his preparations, Kennedy entered the
Harbor House and we followed.

We were passing through the corridor when a page stepped up to Kennedy.
“I beg your pardon, sir,” he announced, “but there is a lady in the
parlor who would like to speak to you and Mr. Jameson, sir.”

Kennedy excused himself from Burke and Steel, and together we went in
the direction of the parlor, eager to discover who it was that sent for
us.

To my surprise, it was Winifred Walcott whom we saw sitting all alone.

“How are you after your thrilling experience last night?” inquired
Kennedy. “It was so early this morning when we left that we really
could not disturb any one to find out. I trust that you are feeling
better?”

“Yes――better,” she repeated, her eyes with an absent look, as though
she was not thinking of how she felt. “I wanted to thank you ever so
much for what you did. Without you, who knows what might have happened
to me or where I should be now?”

There was genuine feeling in her words now, as she went on, “Professor
Kennedy, after what has happened I am afraid that I shall have to
appeal to you for protection. I have thought about it all a great deal,
and still there is no explanation of the strange events of last night.”

“You have no idea who it was who carried you off?”

She shook her head. “You may not believe it, but I have not. All I
remember was being seized from behind and before I knew it I was half
choked, half smothered. That thing wrapped about my head kept me from
seeing or crying out until it was too late. Even then I could not see.
There is only one thing I can say I really know, and that is that
whoever it was that carried me off, it was some one of great strength.
You see, I am no light-weight and pretty strong. Yet I never had a
chance until you and Mr. Jameson and the rest came up back of me. Oh, I
am so sorry I came to your laboratory that day with her!”

Winifred paused. It was evident that she was in a very nervous and
high-strung state, and naturally so. The one thing that seemed
uppermost in her mind was that she had listened to the biased
interpretations of Irene Maddox. The dénouement had proved how wrong
they had been, at least in their suggested characterization of Kennedy.
And she hastened to apologize.

“Not a word about that,” insisted Kennedy. “There was no reason why you
should not have come to see me on any errand and with anybody.”

“Just the same, I am sorry.”

“Has anything more happened to-day?” queried Kennedy, changing the
subject deftly.

“N-no, nothing in particular. I have been thinking mostly of what it
all was about last night. Some one wanted to hold me――but didn’t want
to hurt me. Who could it be? Why?”

“That is exactly what I am trying to find out,” assured Craig. “We went
in to the city on what looked as though it might prove to be a very
promising clue, but nothing came of it. However, it is only a short
while, now, and we shall soon have something to report, I am convinced.”

“Did you see――Mr. Maddox?” she asked, hesitatingly, and I knew that the
mention of Shelby’s name had cost her some effort, after the serious
tiff of the evening before. “He was very solicitous, sent up word, and
some flowers, but could not miss the express, he wrote, on account of
an important engagement.”

“Yes, we saw him for just a minute――down in Wall Street. I believe he
has taken some interest in business lately and has spent much time at
the office of his brokers down-town.”

The look of relief that passed over her face could not easily be
concealed. It was evident that she knew of the sudden early departure
of Paquita and, like Hastings, in her suspicions, had been afraid
that there might be some connection with Shelby. Kennedy did not say
anything about the appearance of Paquita in Wall Street; and, on
reflection, I reasoned that he was right, for it could have no effect
except to arouse unjust suspicions.

Winifred said nothing for a few moments. I wondered what was passing in
her mind. Was she sorry that she had not taken Shelby at his word the
night before? At any rate, she said nothing, nor should I have expected
her to admit anything to us.

“What do your brother and sister-in-law think?” asked Kennedy, at
length.

“Johnson promised to get a detective himself if there was anything new
on which to base suspicions,” she replied. “He seemed rather vexed at
me that I could tell no more, said that no detective could be expected
to catch any one on my hazy description――which, I suppose, is true.”

“And Mrs. Maddox?”

“Oh, she seems to think――well, it’s pretty hard to tell what poor Irene
thinks from one moment to another. She says it’s what I might expect
for being mixed up with the Maddoxes. I can’t see what that has to do
with it, though. I’m not mixed up with them, even if Johnson is.”

There was a naïveté about the remark that was not lost on Kennedy.
Winifred was still mistress of her own heart, at least so she would
have us think. Her solicitude about Shelby and the careful way in which
she refused to let us see that it went too far would have indicated
otherwise. She was really afraid of herself.

“There has been absolutely nothing suspicious since this morning?”
reiterated Kennedy, hoping that she might recall something, no matter
how trivial, that might point the way further ahead.

“Nothing,” she repeated. “I didn’t come down from my room until pretty
late. Everybody had left for the city by that time. I did see that
gentleman who brought us back in his car, though.”

“Oh, Sanchez?” interrogated Craig, his attention aroused in an instant.
“What of him? Did he do or say anything?”

“Nothing except that he inquired very particularly how I was and
whether I had found out anything――nothing more than common politeness
might suggest.”

As for me, I felt sure, now, that there was something much deeper than
courtesy in the inquiry of Sanchez.

“I don’t suppose you noticed anything about him?” asked Craig.

“Nothing except that he avoided Irene Maddox when he saw her coming
toward me. I think I can guess why.”

She nodded knowingly to Kennedy.

“Did he seem to be interested in Paquita’s absence?” pursued Kennedy.

“I can’t say,” strove Winifred to remember. “I did see him talking to
some of the boys about the hotel――that is all.”

“And where did he go?”

“Drove off in his car. It was about the middle of the morning. I
haven’t seen him about since then.”

Winifred seemed quite reassured by the few words with Kennedy, and with
a parting assurance of protection Kennedy and I excused ourselves.

We rejoined Burke and Steel in the lobby, where Burke was nervously
pacing up and down, for precious minutes were being wasted, he felt.
And yet I could not see that he was able to make a move without the aid
of Kennedy.

Like Burke, I, too, was eager to know what it was that Kennedy was
planning to accomplish by the elaborate and secret preparations he was
making. Accordingly, I was not sorry when he decided to go immediately
up to our rooms.

Naturally I was keenly interested in what Kennedy was doing in
establishing his own little wireless plant, but the operator, Steel,
looked at it in increasing wonder as Craig laid out the apparatus in
the room.

“It’s not exactly like anything that I’ve ever seen before,” Steel
remarked, finally. “What do you expect to do with it, sir?”

Kennedy smiled. “I don’t believe you ever did see one of these sets,
although you may have heard of them,” he explained, not pausing in his
work of installing it. “It is an apparatus only lately devised for use
by the United States Government to detect illegalities in the air in
wireless, whether they are committed by amateurs or not.”

As we watched in silence, Kennedy went on explaining. “You know that
wireless apparatus is divided into three parts――the source of power,
whether battery or dynamo; the making and sending of wireless waves,
including the key, spark condenser, and tuning coil; and the receiving
apparatus, head telephones, antennæ, ground and detector.”

Kennedy was talking to us rather than the operator, but now he turned
to him and remarked, “It’s a very compact system, with facilities for a
quick change from one wave-length to another. I suppose you’ve noticed
it――spark gap, quenched type――break system relay, and all the rest.
You understand, I can hear any interference while I’m transmitting.
Take the transformation――by a single throw of this six-point switch. It
tunes the oscillating and open circuits to resonance. It’s very clever
and, best of all, efficient.”

His wireless installed and adjusted, Kennedy clapped the ear-pieces
on and tuned it up. Not only he, but the wireless operator tried it,
rapidly changing the wave-lengths, as the system admitted, in the hope
of discovering something. Whatever it was that had caused the trouble
at the Seaville Station, it was not working now. They seemed able to
discover nothing.

This had been going on for some time when our telephone rang and Burke
jumped to answer it.

“That’s one of my men,” he exclaimed with a gesture that indicated he
had forgotten something. “I meant to tell you that they were holding a
funeral service for Marshall Maddox, and this apparatus of yours clean
knocked it out of my head. Hello!... Yes, I remember. Wait.” Burke put
his hand over the transmitter and looked at us. “Do you want to go?” he
asked.

“I think I would like to see them together again,” Craig replied, after
a moment’s consideration.

“All right,” returned Burke, removing his hand. “We’ll be down in a
minute.”

Kennedy took from another package what looked like an arrangement
containing a phonograph cylinder, and attached it, through a proper
contrivance, to his receiving apparatus.

“Now I think we can safely leave this thing,” bustled Kennedy, eager to
get back in touch with things at Westport.

The wireless operator, Steel, glanced at his watch. “I’m due back at
Seaville soon to do my trick. Is there anything else I can tell you or
do for you?”

Kennedy thanked him. “Not just at the moment,” he returned. “We shall
have to wait now until something happens. Perhaps you are right. I
think the best thing you can do is to return to Seaville and keep your
eyes and ears open. If there is anything at all that comes up that
seems to lead to our wireless jammer, I wish you would let me know.”

Steel was only too glad to promise and, a moment later, left us to
return to the wireless station.




                                  XIX

                        THE WIRELESS WIRETAPPER


A few moments later we went down-stairs again and Burke drove us in
his car up to the town, where, in the main street, was a little chapel
whose bell was now tolling slowly and mournfully.

As his car drew up at the end of the long line down the street, I saw
why Kennedy had decided to break into the time so sorely needed in our
own investigation of the case. It seemed as though every one must be at
the funeral, even the reporters from New York. Kennedy and I managed to
avoid them, but their presence testified to the wide interest that the
case had aroused throughout the country.

“Rather a telling object-lesson in the business that the Maddoxes
are in,” commented Kennedy as we walked the rest of the way to the
shrubbery-surrounded chapel. “If there is such a thing as retributive
justice, this is the result of the business of making a profit out of
mere instruments to kill.”

I fancied that there was more than coincidence behind the reasoning.
The Maddoxes had been so long engaged in making munitions, devoid
of any feeling of patriotism, had amassed such an immense fortune
out of which the curse had been taken by no philanthropy, that it
must undoubtedly be a true philosophy which traced from their very
business and consequent character the evils and tragedies that followed
in the wake of the Maddox millions. I reflected that even over the
telautomaton, the destroyer itself, there had been no thought of public
service in the family, but merely the chance to extort more gain from
the frailties and sufferings of humanity. And now this was the end of
one arch-extortioner.

There seemed to be something hollow in the funeral of Marshall Maddox.
It took me some time to explain it to myself. It was not because we
were there, outsiders, and in our capacity of observers, in fact almost
spies, although that may have had something to do with the impression
it made on me.

The little chapel was crowded, but with the curious who had heard vague
rumors about the death. As I looked at the real mourners I fancied that
my impression must be due to them, that somehow this was a mockery of
mourning.

I could not imagine that Irene Maddox was overwhelmed by grief after
what had occurred to her. As for the gay little Paquita, she was, of
course, not there at all, and her presence would only have sounded a
new note of hollowness. I had not seen her manifest any deep sign of
grief. At present, I supposed, she was still in New York, going about
her own or some unknown business as unconcerned as if nothing had
happened.

Shelby Maddox had come up from whatever business he was engaged in
in New York just in time for the service. Once or twice I thought he
showed real grief, as though the death of his brother brought back to
his recollection other and better days. Yet I could not help wondering
whether even his emotions might not be affectation for our benefit, for
the tragedy seemed not to have deterred him from doing pretty much as
he might have done anyhow.

I looked about for Winifred Walcott. Evidently the strain of events had
been too much for her. She was not there, but her brother was there
with his wife, who was next to her own brother, Shelby.

The service was short and formal, and I shall not dwell on it, for,
after all, nothing occurred during it which changed our attitude toward
any of those present.

For a brief moment at the close the family were together, and I felt
that Shelby was the most human of them all, at least. Mrs. Walcott and
her husband were the first to leave, and I could not help comparing it
with a previous occasion, when they had taken Irene Maddox in their
car. A little later Shelby appeared with his sister-in-law, leaving her
only when some of her own family, who had come to Westport evidently to
be with her, appeared.

Instead of going to the Lodge he walked slowly down to the pier and
jumped into one of his tenders that was waiting to take him out to the
_Sybarite_, alone. Now and then I had seen him glance sharply about,
but it was not at us that he was looking. He seemed rather to be hoping
that he might chance to meet Winifred Walcott. I think she was much
more on his mind at present than even his brother.

Johnson Walcott and his wife passed us in their car and we could see
them stop at the Harbor House porte-cochère. Frances Walcott alighted
and, after a moment talking together, Johnson drove away alone,
swinging around into the road to the city.

Our friends of the Secret Service seemed to be about everywhere, but
unobtrusively, observing. There was much that was interesting to
observe, but nothing that pointed the way to the solution of the
mystery. The funeral over; it was again the old Maddox house of hate,
each member going his own way. It was as though an armistice had been
declared, and now the truce was over. I felt that we might now expect
war again, to the last dollar. It was not to be expected that any of
them would allow the other to control without a fight, nor relinquish
any claim that was not fully compensated.

One bright spot only shone out in the drab of the situation. So far the
dead hand of the Maddox millions had not stretched out and fallen on
the lovely and pure personality of Winifred Walcott. The more I thought
of it the more I had come to fear that these hates and jealousies and
bitter rivalries might engulf her as they had many others.

Had that been the trouble with Irene Maddox? Had she been once even as
Winifred now was? Had she been drawn into this maelstrom of money? I
dreaded the thought of the possible outcome of the romance of Shelby
Maddox and Winifred. Would it, too, blast another life――or might it be
that by some miracle Winifred might take out the curse that hung over
the blood-money of the Maddoxes? Never before had our responsibility
in the case, far beyond the mere unraveling of the mystery, presented
itself to me so forcibly as it did now, after the solemn and sobering
influence of the last rites of the murdered head of the house.

We came along past the carriage entrance to the Lodge again. Beside
the door were piled several large packages, and the uniformed boy who
presided over that entrance of the Lodge was evidently much worried
over them. Burke had left us on the way up, and as we turned the boy at
the door caught sight of Kennedy and hurried over to us.

“The young man said these were for you, sir,” he announced, indicating
the packages, undecided whether to play for a tip or to ask to have
them taken away.

“Oh yes,” recognized Kennedy, as Watkins, who had brought them down,
appeared. “Some stuff I had brought from the city. Will you help me
down to the dock with them?”

The boy was more than willing. Not only were the packages to be taken
away from his door, but Kennedy had crossed his palm with a coin. With
Watkins he carried the things down.

Kennedy had no intention at present, evidently, of using the material
which had come from New York, but left it in the little summer-house in
charge of the student.

We were about to turn back to the Casino and the Lodge, when Craig
caught my eye and nodded in the direction of the beach. There I could
see the solitary figure of a girl coming slowly along. It was Winifred
Walcott. I watched her. Evidently she had been out for a walk alone.

Now and then she gave a quick glance across the water and I soon
realized that it was at the _Sybarite_ she looked. Shelby had long
since reached the yacht, but apparently she had seen his tender dashing
out there. I could not help but think of the stroll that Shelby
had taken with Paquita the night before down the beach in the same
direction. Was Winifred thinking of it, too, and was she sorry that she
had dismissed him without accepting his explanation at its face value?

“That shows what a great part chance plays in our lives,” mused Kennedy
to me, as we watched her. “They’re thinking of each other. If Shelby
had been a few minutes later, or she had been a few minutes earlier,
they would have met. I suppose they are both too proud to go to each
other now.”

“You’re not contemplating being a matchmaker?” I hazarded.

“On the contrary,” he smiled, “I think we shall gain more by letting
events take their natural course. No, chance must bring them together
again.”

Miss Walcott had seen us by this time, and seemed to realize that we
were talking about her, for she quickened her pace and, instead of
coming up to the summer-house, left the beach by another flight of
steps, though not so far away that we could not see a faint flush on
her cheeks as she purposely avoided us.

We, too, went toward the Lodge, but did not overtake her.

On the veranda of the Lodge, waiting for us, was Riley, just returned
from the city.

“Where is Paquita?” inquired Kennedy. “Tell me what has happened?”

“Nothing much,” returned Riley, chagrined. “I stuck to her pretty
closely. She’s back, you know.”

“I think I have an idea of what it was all about,” ventured Kennedy.

Riley nodded. “Mr. Burke has told me something of the cipher message
to her, sir. I think you are right. She must have tried to divert our
attention.”

“How does she seem?” inquired Kennedy.

Riley chuckled. “I think she’s terribly miffed,” he replied. “She acts
to me as though she was disappointed in us――in you particularly. You
don’t follow her about New York. I don’t think she quite understands
what happened. You don’t play according to Hoyle.”

“What did she do after that last telephone call?”

“Nothing――absolutely nothing. Oh, it was a plant, all right. She came
back in the car, after awhile. We passed the church while the funeral
was going on. She never even looked. Say, what has become of Sanchez?”

Kennedy retailed what Winifred had said about the sallow-faced man and
his solicitude.

“I’ll wager he’ll be along soon, now,” asserted Riley, with
professional assurance. “I just saw Irene Maddox, after she came back
from the funeral. She seems to be rather out of it, doesn’t she? Since
her own folks arrived the Maddoxes and the Walcotts seem to feel that
they have no further responsibility.”

Kennedy smiled at the garrulity of the detective. “What made you
connect Sanchez and Irene Maddox?” he asked. “Don’t you think she is
really through with him?”

“I guess she is,” returned Riley. “But I can’t say the same of him.
If I could only get at the true relation of that fellow with Paquita
I’d be a good deal happier. Mrs. Maddox may have hired him to shadow
her, but, if you want to know what I think, it is that that Mex, or
whatever he is, has actually fallen in love with the girl.”

“Another love affair?” I queried, sarcastically. “Then all I’ve got to
say is that they’re well matched.”

“All right,” defended Riley, rather hotly. “But we know that he
double-crossed Mrs. Maddox, don’t we? Well, then, if he’s working for
anybody else now, what reason have you to suppose that he won’t double
cross them too? Mr. Burke thinks there may be a gang of them. All
right. What’s to prevent this Sanchez from being stuck on her in that
case? There are all sorts in the underworld, and there’s no telling
what a woman or a man may do.”

“But look at the way she acts toward Shelby Maddox,” I urged. “If ever
there was a woman who threw herself at a man, that’s a case of it.”

“Part of the game, part of the game,” returned Riley.

“What game?” interrupted Kennedy, who had been listening to us in
amused silence.

Riley was not ready with an answer on the spur of the moment, and, as
it was not my contention, I did not attempt it.

“Well,” finished the Secret Service man as he left us, “I’m going to
look about, just the same, and you can take it from me this thing will
never be cleared up until we explain that fellow Sanchez.”

Kennedy said nothing as Riley walked away, but I fancied that
underneath he concurred largely with the operative.

We were about to leave the veranda when Burke rejoined us, his face
indicating that some new problem had come up.

“I wonder what Shelby Maddox can be up to,” he began, as though
appealing for aid. “I was using the telephone, and while I waited for
my number I got to talking with the little girl at the switchboard. She
tells me that in the last day or two, while Shelby has been out here,
he has been talking a great deal over the wire with New York and has
placed some large orders through different brokers for Maddox Munitions
stock.”

It was an important piece of news. I recalled Hastings’s wonder at
Shelby’s trips in to the city and our own discovery that he had been
visiting a broker, coupled with the presence of Paquita down-town in
the same building.

“Maddox Munitions isn’t so low that it’s a good buy,” considered Burke,
“unless there’s some scheme to manipulate it up. It had a little
slump when Marshall Maddox died, but recovered. What its future will
be without him no one can say. There’s no reason why it shouldn’t
decline――but it hasn’t done so.”

“Perhaps that’s the game,” I suggested. “Maybe Shelby is holding the
market up. Some one must be supporting it. Why, if it weren’t for some
support, I’ll wager the stock would have broken worse than it did, and
it wouldn’t have recovered.”

Kennedy nodded, not so much in approval of the explanation as at the
line of thought that the idea suggested.

“Do you suppose,” speculated Burke, “that there can be some
manipulation of Maddox Munitions going on under cover? What can be
Shelby’s purpose in all this? Perhaps we’re mistaken in that young man,
and he’s a great deal deeper than any of us give him credit for being.
Would it be impossible that he might be planning to get the control
from the others?”

It was an explanation that could not be easily put aside. Only death
had wrested the control from the elder brother. Who was there to take
his place? Had Shelby undergone a transformation almost overnight?
Or――more horrible thought――had the whole affair been preconceived from
the conference on the yacht and the murder to the manipulation of the
market?

What with both Riley and Burke theorizing on the case, I could see
that Kennedy was growing a bit impatient. Though he formed many of
them, theories never appealed to Kennedy as long as one little fact
might knock out the prettiest deduction.

“We’ve been away from our room a long time,” he interjected, as though
remembering what we had originally started to do. “Something must have
happened by this time or we’ll never get anything. Let’s go up there
and see whether our wireless wiretapper has caught anything yet.”

Scarcely past the door Kennedy nudged me, a signal to be on guard.
I looked cautiously about. Sitting in the lobby where she could see
everybody who came and went was Paquita. She saw us approaching,
but made no effort to avoid us. In fact, I felt sure that it was we
for whom she was looking. If it was, Kennedy did not give her any
satisfaction by letting her know that we even noticed it. We passed by,
still chatting, though careful to say nothing that could not safely be
overheard, and entered the elevator. As the door clanged shut Paquita
flashed a chagrined glance at us. It said as plainly as words that she
wanted to focus our attention on herself instead of something else.

Up in the room Kennedy fairly ripped the wax cylinder from his wireless
machine and jammed it into what looked like a miniature phonograph.

“A recording device invented by Marconi,” he explained, as a succession
of strange sounds issued from the reproducer.

I could make nothing out of it, but Kennedy seemed quite excited and
elated.

“It’s not a wireless message at all,” he exclaimed.

“Then what is it?” I inquired.

He listened a moment more, then burst out, “No, not a message. That’s
just wireless power itself. And it seems to come from the water side,
too.”

He relapsed into silence, leaving us only to speculate.

What possible object could there be in the use of wireless power
solely? Why did it come from the water? Was there a boat hanging about,
perhaps flying the burgee of some well-known club, yet in reality to be
used for some criminal purpose?




                                   XX

                            THE SPEED DEMON


There seemed to be no use in staying longer in our room observing the
behavior of the wireless detector, when the very neighborhood still
bristled with mystery and perhaps danger.

Accordingly, we went down-stairs again with Burke, just in time to meet
Hastings, who had come down on the late afternoon train from the city.

“Has anything happened since we left?” inquired Kennedy of the lawyer,
before he could begin to quiz us.

“Very little,” he replied. “The man was still watching that little
office where the detectaphone wire led, when I left. Not a soul has
been near it. I think you can assume that it has been left abandoned.”

“I thought as much,” agreed Craig. “Have you heard anything more about
the activity of Shelby? He was here at the funeral this afternoon.
He’s out on the _Sybarite_ now, and has been very quiet, at least down
here.”

“I’ve been making some inquiries,” replied Hastings, slowly. “As nearly
as any of the brokers I know can tell, I should say that Shelby must
be doing something. There have been several large blocks of stock
unloaded and they have all been taken up. In spite of it the price has
been maintained. But it’s all underground. I haven’t decided which side
Shelby is on, bear or bull. He never was on either side before, so I
don’t know what he is up to. You can reason it out either way――and,
after all, it is a matter of fact, not reason.”

“It won’t take long to find that out to-morrow, if we want to,”
remarked Kennedy. “The trouble to-day was that there were more pressing
things that had to be done.”

We had scarcely finished outlining to Hastings what we had discovered
at Westport when Riley edged up to report to Burke.

“Miss Walcott’s acting very strangely, sir,” he ventured. “You’d think
she hadn’t a friend in the world.”

“How’s that?” cut in Kennedy.

“I saw her coming up from the beach awhile ago alone,” replied Riley.
“First she passed Mrs. Maddox and they scarcely spoke, then later I saw
her do the same thing with Mrs. Walcott. They’ve been that way, now,
for some time.”

“Where is she――in her room?” asked Burke.

Riley nodded. “Yes.”

“I can’t see any reason why she should stay here, if she feels this way
about it,” put in Hastings testily. “She doesn’t belong to the family.”

Kennedy glanced covertly at me. I fancied I understood what was in
his mind. Winifred Walcott probably would not have admitted, even to
herself, why she stayed.

“That little dancer and Miss Walcott are as friendly as Kilkenny cats,
too,” added Riley, with a left-handed attempt at humor.

“You have an X-ray eye,” commented Craig, with veiled sarcasm, which
quite amused me, for the detective actually took it literally and
thanked him. “Paquita is still about, then?”

“Yes, sir. Right after you went up-stairs she had her car brought
around and started out for a spin――down the shore road. But she must
have seen that one of our men was following, for she turned up-country
and was back again in half an hour. If she intended to do anything, she
must have been scared off. She’s up-stairs now, dressing for dinner,
I suppose. I’ve got her checkmated. She can’t move without my knowing
it――and she knows it.”

“Down the shore road,” repeated Kennedy, reflectively. “I wonder what
she could have wanted down there. The wireless impulses came from the
water side. Walter would you mind going down on the dock and telling
that young man of mine he had better get a bite to eat right away and
that then he can begin getting the stuff unpacked and set up!”

While Watkins took a hasty dinner at the Lodge, I relieved him of
watching the packages he had brought. It was a tiresome wait, for I
longed to be with Kennedy.

One thing, however, broke the monotony. Once when I looked up I caught
sight of a launch putting out from the _Sybarite_ and feathering over
the choppy waves in the direction of the dock. As it came closer I saw
that it contained Shelby Maddox, still alone. He came ashore and, as
he walked up the dock, saw me and nodded absently. Evidently he was
thinking of something else.

I was glad to rejoin Kennedy a few minutes later when Watkins returned
and began to unwrap the packages, as Craig had ordered. Fortunately
for the sake of my curiosity, nothing had occurred during my absence,
except that Craig and Burke had seen Shelby enter, although he had done
nothing.

It was the dinner hour and the guests were beginning to enter the
dining-room. Shelby had already done so, selecting a table where he
was in sight of that usually occupied by the Walcotts. Their table
seemed deserted to-night. Johnson Walcott was not yet back, and Irene
Maddox now sat at another table, with those of her family who had come
to be with her at the funeral. Winifred did not come down to dinner
at all, which seemed to vex Shelby, for it looked as though she were
avoiding him. The only person at the table was Frances Walcott.

Convinced that no one else was coming in, Shelby glumly hurried through
his meal, and finally, unable to stand it any longer, rose, and on the
way out stopped to talk with his sister.

What was said we could not guess. But it was more like a parley during
an armistice than a talk between brother and sister, and it did not
seem to do Shelby much good.

Finally he drifted out aimlessly into the lobby again. As he stood
undecided, we caught a glimpse of the petite figure of Paquita flitting
from an alcove in his direction. Before he could avoid her she spoke to
him.

However unwelcome the meeting might have been to Shelby――and his face
showed plainly that it was so――there could be no doubt of Paquita’s
eagerness to see him. As I looked at her I could only wonder at the
strangeness of life. She whom men had pursued and had found elusive,
even when they thought they had her captured, was now herself in the
anomalous rôle of pursuer. And the man whom she pursued cared no more
for her than she for those who pursued her. Nay more, he was openly,
hopelessly in love with another woman, in every respect the antithesis
of herself. Much as I disliked Paquita’s type, though realizing her
fascination as a study, I could not help seeing the potential tragedy
and pathos of the situation.

She did not accuse or upbraid. On the contrary, she was using every
art of which she was a past mistress to fascinate and attract. I did
not need prompting from Kennedy to see the strange romance of the
situation. The little dancer was subtly matching all the charm and all
the knowledge of men and the world which she possessed against the
appeal that Winifred had made to a hitherto latent side of Shelby’s
nature. The struggle between the two women was no less enthralling than
the unraveling of the mystery of Marshall Maddox’s death.

“By Heaven!” I heard Kennedy mutter under his breath, as we watched
Paquita and Shelby, “I wonder whether it is right to let events take
their course. Yes――it must be. If he cannot go through it now, he’ll
never be able to. Yes, Shelby Maddox must fight that out for himself.
He shall not ruin the life of Winifred Walcott.”

His remark set me thinking of the responsibility Craig had had thrust
on him. It was far more than merely running down the murderer of
Marshall Maddox, now.

Shelby himself evidently appreciated what faced him. I could see that
he was talking very bluntly and pointedly to her, almost rudely. Now
and then she flashed a glance at him which, with her flushed face and
the emotion expressed in her very being, could not have failed only
three days ago. Shelby seemed to feel it, and took refuge in what
looked to be an almost harshness of manner with her.

Kennedy jogged my arm and I followed his eyes. In the alcove from which
she had come I was not surprised to see Sanchez, standing and looking
at them. His dark eyes seemed riveted on the man as though he hated him
with a supernal hate. What would he himself not have given to be where
Shelby was? I wondered whether his blinded eyes saw the truth about
Shelby’s position. I doubted it, for it was with difficulty that he
restrained himself. Black and ominous were the looks that he darted at
the younger man. Indeed, I did not envy him.

As I turned to say something to Kennedy I saw that Sanchez and
ourselves were not the only ones interested. Frances Maddox had just
come out of the dining room, had seen her brother and Paquita, and had
drawn back into the shadow of a doorway leading to the porch, where
she could see them better without being seen by them. Yet she betrayed
nothing of her feelings toward either.

Meanwhile Shelby had been getting more and more vehement as he talked.
I could not hear, but it was quite evident now that he was repeating
and enforcing the remarks he had made to Paquita the night before
during their secret stroll down the beach. And she, instead of getting
angry, as he no doubt hoped she would, was keeping her temper and her
control of herself in a most dangerous manner.

There was so much to think about that it was not until now that I
noticed that the face we had seen in the alcove was gone. Sanchez had
disappeared. Had the thing been too much for him? Was it that he could
not trust himself to stay? At any rate, he was gone.

Just then Shelby turned on his heel, almost brutally, and deliberately
walked away. It was as though he felt it his only escape from
temptation.

Paquita took an involuntary step after him, then stopped short. I
followed her quick glance to see what it might be that had deterred
her. She had caught sight of Frances Walcott, whose interest had
betrayed her into letting the light stream through the doorway on her
face. Instantly Paquita covered the vexation that was on her face.
Least of all would she let this man’s sister see it. Consummate actress
that she was, she turned and walked across the lobby, and a moment
later was in gay conversation with another of her numerous admirers.
But it did not take an eye more trained than mine to see the gaiety was
forced, the animation of quite a different character from that she had
showed to Shelby.

“Of one thing we can be sure,” remarked Craig. “Miss Walcott will hear
all about this. I hope she hears the truth. I’m almost tempted to tell
her myself.” He paused, debating. “No,” he decided, finally, “the time
hasn’t come yet.”

Shelby had retreated to the porch, where now he was pacing up and down,
alone. As he came past the door his abstracted glance fell with a start
on his sister. He drew himself together and spoke to her. Evidently
he was debating whether she had seen anything, and, if so, how much
and how she had interpreted it. At any rate, he was at pains to speak
now, hoping that she might carry a message which he dared not send.
What was going on in their minds I could not guess, but to outward
appearance they were more like brother and sister than I had seen them
ever before.

They parted finally and Shelby continued his measured tread about the
porch, as though trying to make up his mind on a course of action. For
about a quarter of an hour he walked, then, his face set in determined
lines, entered the Lodge and went deliberately over to a florist’s
stand. There, oblivious to anything else, he selected the handsomest
bunch of violets on the stand. He was about to drop his card into their
fragrant and reconciling depths when he paused, replaced the card in
his case, and directed the man to deliver them anonymously. There was
no need for us to inquire where they were sent.

Still oblivious to the gay life of the Lodge and Casino, he strode out
into the night and down to the dock, paying no attention to Craig’s
student as he passed. He stepped into the tender which was still
waiting and we saw him head straight for the _Sybarite_. Ten minutes
later the lights in the main saloon flashed up. Shelby was evidently at
work over some problem, wrestling it out himself. Was it his relations
with Winifred or his stock-market schemes――or both?

“Well, I’ve been looking all over for you. Where have you been?”
sounded Burke’s voice back of us, as Kennedy and I were silently
looking out over the dark waters at the yacht.

Without waiting for us to reply Burke hurried on. “You remember that
operator, Steel, that was here from Seaville?”

“Yes,” encouraged Kennedy. “What of him?”

“He went back to the station and has done his trick. He has just
crossed over again with a message to me. That wireless power, whatever
it is, is jamming the air again. I thought you’d like to know of it.”

For just a second Kennedy looked at Burke in silence, then without
further inquiry turned and almost ran down the length of the dock to
the float at the end.

There Watkins had already set up on the float a large affair which
looked for all the world like a mortar. We watched as Craig fussed with
it to make sure that everything was all right. Meanwhile the student
continued adjusting something else that had been let down over the edge
of the float into the water. It seemed to be a peculiar disk, heavy and
suspended by a stout wire which allowed it to be submerged eight or ten
feet.

“What’s this thing?” inquired Burke, looking at the mortar over which
Craig was bending. “Fireworks, or are you going to bombard somebody?”

“It’s a light-weight rocket mortar,” explained Kennedy, ramming
something into it. “You’ll see in a moment. Stand back, all of you――off
the float――on the dock.”

Suddenly there came a deep detonation from the mortar and a rocket shot
out and up in a long, low parabola. Kennedy rushed forward, and another
detonation sent a second far out in a different angle.

“What is it?” gasped Burke, in amazement.

“Look!” called Kennedy, elated.

Another instant, and from every quarter of the harbor there seemed
to rise, as if from the waves, huge balls of fire, a brilliant and
luminous series of flames literally from the water itself. It was
a moonless night but these fires seemed literally to roll back the
Cimmerian darkness.

“A recent invention,” explained Craig, “light-bombs, for use at night
against torpedo-boat and aeroplane attacks.”

“Light-bombs!” Burke repeated.

“Yes, made of phosphide of calcium. The mortar hurls them out, and they
are so constructed that they float after a short plunge in the water.
You see, the action of the salt water automatically ignites them merely
by contact and the chemical action of the phosphide and the salt water
keeps them phosphorescing for several minutes.”

As he talked he shot off some more.

“Kennedy, you’re a genius,” gasped Burke. “You’re always ready for
anything.”

The sight before us was indeed a beautiful pyrotechnic display. The
bombs lighted up the shores and the low-lying hills, making everything
stand forth and cast long spectral shadows. Cottages hidden among trees
or in coves along the wide sweep of the shore line stood out as if in
an unearthly flare.

What people on the shore thought we had no time even to wonder. They
crowded out on the porches, in consternation. The music at the Casino
stopped. No one had ever seen anything like it before. It was fire on
water!

As yet none of us had even an inkling of what it was that Kennedy
expected to discover. But every craft in the harbor now stood out
distinct――in the glare of a miniature sun. We could see that,
naturally, excitement on the boats was greater than it was on shore,
for they were closer to the flares and therefore it seemed more amazing.

Craig was scanning the water carefully, seeking any sign of something
suspicious.

“There it is!” he exclaimed, bending forward and pointing.

We strained our eyes. A mile or two out I could distinguish a
power-boat of good size, moving swiftly away, as though trying to round
the shelter of a point of land, out of the light. With a glass some one
made out a stubby wireless mast on her.

Kennedy’s surmise when we had first studied the wireless interference
had proved correct.

Sure enough, in the blackness of the night, there was a fast express
cruiser, of the new scout type, not large, almost possible for one man
to control, the latest thing in small power-boats and a perfect demon
for speed!

Was that the source of the strange wireless impulses? Whose was it, and
why was it there?




                                  XXI

                           THE SUBMARINE EAR


Almost before we knew it the speed demon had disappeared beyond the
circle of the flares.

“Suspiciously near the _Sybarite_,” remarked Kennedy, under his breath,
watching the scout cruiser to the last moment as she ran away.

I wondered whether he meant that the swift little motor-boat might
have some connection with Shelby Maddox and his new activities, but I
said nothing, for Kennedy’s attention was riveted on the wake left by
the boat. I looked, too, and could have sworn that there was something
moving in the opposite direction to that taken by the boat. What could
it be?

On the end of the dock was an incandescent lamp. Craig unscrewed the
bulb and inserted another connection in the bulb socket, an insulated
cable that led down to the apparatus on the float over which his
assistant was still working.

By this time quite a crowd had collected on the dock, and on the float,
watching us.

“Burke,” ordered Kennedy, “will you and Jameson make the people stand
back? We can’t do anything with so many around.”

As we pressed the new-comers back I saw that among them was Paquita.
Though I looked, I could not discover Sanchez, but thought nothing of
it, for there were so many about that it would have been hard to find
any particular person.

“If you will please stand back,” I implored, trying to keep the
curious from almost swamping the float, “you will all be able to
see what is going on just as well and, besides, it will be a great
deal safer――providing there is an explosion,” I added as a happy
afterthought, although I had almost as vague an idea what Kennedy was
up to as any of them.

The words had the effect I intended. The crowd gave way, not only
willing, but almost in panic.

As they pressed back, however, Paquita pressed forward until she was
standing beside me.

“Is――Mr. Maddox――out there?” she asked, pointing out at the _Sybarite_
anxiously.

“Why?” I demanded, hoping in her anxiety to catch her off guard.

She shot a quick glance at me. There was no denying that the woman was
clever and quick of perception.

“Oh, I just wondered,” she murmured. “I wanted to see him, so
much――that is all. And it’s very urgent.”

She glanced about, as though hoping to discover some means of
communicating with the yacht, even of getting out to it. But there did
not seem to be any offered.

I determined to watch her, and for that reason did not insist that she
get back as far as the rest of the crowd. All the time I saw that she
was looking constantly out at the _Sybarite_. Did she know something
about Shelby Maddox that we did not know? I wondered if, indeed, there
might be some valid reason why she should get out there. What did she
suspect?

Again she came forward, inquiring whether there was not some way of
communicating with the _Sybarite_, and again, when I tried to question
her, she refused to give me any satisfaction. However, I could not help
noticing that in spite of the cold manner in which Shelby had treated
her, she seemed now to be actuated more by the most intense fear for
him than by any malice against him.

What it meant I had the greatest curiosity to know, especially when I
noticed that Paquita was glancing nervously about as though in great
fear that some one might be present and see her. Nor did she seem to
be deterred from showing her feelings by the fact that she knew that I,
Kennedy’s closest friend, was watching and would undoubtedly report to
him. It was as though she had abandoned discretion and cast fear to the
winds.

As the minutes passed and nothing happened, Paquita became a trifle
calmer and managed to take refuge in the crowd.

I took the opportunity again to run my eye over them. Nowhere in
the crowd could I discover Winifred, or, in fact, any of the Maddox
family. They seemed to be studiously avoiding appearance in public just
now, and I could not blame them, for in a summer colony like that at
Westport facts never troubled gossipers.

“What do you suppose Kennedy is afraid of?” whispered Hastings in my
ear, nervously. “Your friend is positively uncanny, and I can almost
feel that he fears something.”

“I’m sure I don’t know,” I confessed, “but I’ve seen enough of him
to be sure that no one is going to catch him napping. Here’s Riley.
Perhaps he has some news.”

The Secret Service operative had shouldered his way through the throng,
looking for Burke, who was right behind me.

“What’s the matter,” demanded his chief.

“There’s another message, by telephone from the Seaville Station,”
Riley reported. “They say they are having the same trouble again――only
more of it.”

“That operator, Steel, came back again,” considered Burke. “Where is
he?”

“As soon as I got the message, I hunted him up and took the liberty of
sending him up to Mr. Kennedy’s room to look at that arrangement there.
I couldn’t make anything out of it myself, I knew, and I thought that
he could.”

“Did he?” inquired Burke.

“Yes. Of course he hadn’t seen it work before. But I told him as nearly
as I could what you had told me, and it didn’t take him very long to
catch on to the thing. After that he said that what was being recorded
now must be just the same as it had been before when Mr. Kennedy was
there――not messages, but just impulses.”

“Where is he――down here?”

“No, I left him up there. I thought it might be best to have some one
there. Did you want to speak to him? There’s a telephone down here in
the boat-house up to the switchboard at the Lodge.”

Riley jerked his thumb back over his shoulder at a little shelter built
on the end of the dock.

“N-no,” considered Burke. “I wouldn’t know what to tell him.”

“But I think you ought to tell Kennedy that,” I interrupted. “He might
know what to do.”

Together Riley and I walked across the float to where Craig was at
work, and briefly I told him what had happened.

He looked grave, but did not pause in his adjustment of the machine,
whatever it was.

“That’s all right,” he approved. “Yes, get the operator on the wire.
Tell him to stay up there. And――yes――tell him to detach that phonograph
recording device and go back to straight wireless. He might try to wake
up the operator on the _Sybarite_, if he can. I guess he must know the
call. Have him do that and then have that telephone girl keep the line
clear and connected from the boat-house up to my room. I want to keep
in touch with Steel.”

Riley and I pushed through the crowd and finally managed to deliver
Kennedy’s message, in spite of the excitement at the Lodge, which had
extended by this time to the switchboard operator. I left Riley in the
boat-house to hold the wire up to our room, and rejoined Burke and
Hastings on the float.

Kennedy had been working with redoubled energy, now that the light
bombs had gone out after serving their purpose. We stood apart now as
he made a final inspection of the apparatus which he and his assistant
had installed.

Finally Craig pressed down a key which seemed to close a circuit
including the connection in the electric-light socket and the
arrangement that had been let over the edge of the float. Standing
where we were we could feel a sort of dull metallic vibration under our
feet, as it were.

“What are you doing?” inquired Hastings, looking curiously at a
headgear which Kennedy had over his ears.

“It works!” exclaimed Craig, more to Watkins than to us.

“What does?” persisted Hastings.

“This Fessenden oscillator,” he cried, apparently for the first time
recognizing that Hastings had been addressing him.

“What is it?” we asked crowding about. “What does it do?”

“It’s a system for the employment of sound for submarine signals,” he
explained, hurriedly. “I am using it to detect moving objects in the
water――under the water, perhaps. It’s really a submarine ear.”

In our excitement we could only watch him in wonder.

“People don’t realize the great advance that has been made in the
use of water instead of air as a medium for transmitting sounds,” he
continued, after a pause, during which he seemed to be listening,
observing a stop watch, and figuring rapidly on a piece of paper, all
at once. “I can’t stop to explain this apparatus, but, roughly, it is
composed of a ring magnet, a copper tube which lies in an air gap of a
magnetic field, and a stationary central armature. The magnetic field
is much stronger than that in an ordinary dynamo of this size.”

Again he listened, as he pressed the key, and we felt the peculiar
vibration, while he figured on the paper.

“The copper tube,” he resumed mechanically to us, though his real
attention was on something else, “has an alternating current induced in
it. It is attached to solid disks of steel, which in turn are attached
to a steel diaphragm an inch thick. Surrounding the oscillator is a
large watertight drum.”

“Then it makes use of sound-waves in the water?” queried Hastings,
almost incredulously.

“Exactly,” returned Craig. “I use the same instrument for sending and
receiving――only I’m not doing any real sending. You see, like the
ordinary electric motor, it is capable of acting as a generator, too
and a very efficient one. All I have to do is to throw a switch in one
direction when I want to telegraph or telephone under water, and in the
other direction when I want to listen.”

“Talking through water!” exclaimed Burke, awestruck by the very idea,
as though it were scarcely believable.

“That’s not exactly what I’m doing now,” returned Kennedy, indulgently,
“although I could do it if there was any one around this part of the
country equipped to receive and reply. I rather suspect, though, that
whoever it is is not only not equipped, but wouldn’t want to reply,
anyhow.”

“Then what are you doing?” asked Burke, rather mystified.

“Well, you see I can send out signals and listen for their
reflection――really the echo under water. More than that, I can get the
sounds direct from any source that is making them. If there was a big
steamer out there I could hear her engines and propellers, even if I
couldn’t see her around the point. Light travels in straight lines, but
you can get sounds around a corner, as it were.”

“Oh,” I exclaimed, “I think I see. Even if that little scout cruiser
did disappear around the point, you can still hear her through the
water. Is that it?”

“Partly,” nodded Kennedy. “You know, sound travels through water at a
velocity of about four thousand feet a second. For instance, I find
I can get an echo from somewhere practically instantaneously. That’s
the bottom of the bay――here. Another echo comes back to me in about a
twentieth of a second. That, I take it, is reflected from the sea wall
on the shore, back of us, at high tide. It must be roughly a hundred
feet――you see, that corresponds. It is a matter of calculation.”

“Is that all?” I prompted, as he paused again.

“No, I’ve located the echo from the _Sybarite_ and some others. But,”
he added slowly, “there’s one I can’t account for. There’s a sound
that is coming to me direct from somewhere. I can’t just place it, for
there isn’t a moving craft visible and it doesn’t give the same note
as that little cruiser. It’s sharper. Just now I tried to send out my
own impulses in the hope of getting an echo from it, and I succeeded.
The echo comes back to me in something more than five seconds. You see,
that would make twenty thousand-odd feet. Half of that would be nearly
two miles, and that roughly corresponds with the position where we
saw the scout cruiser at first, before it fled. There’s something out
there.”

“Then I was right,” I exclaimed excitedly. “I thought I saw something
in the wake of the cruiser.”

Kennedy shook his head gravely. “I’m afraid you were,” he muttered.
“There’s something there, all right. That wireless operator is up in
our room and you have a wire from the boathouse to him?”

“Yes,” I returned. “Riley’s holding it open.”

Anxiously Kennedy listened again in silence, as though to verify some
growing suspicion. What was it he heard?

Quickly he pulled the headgear off and before I knew it had clapped it
on my own head.

“Tell me what it sounds like,” he asked, tensely.

I listened eagerly, though I was no electrical or mechanical engineer,
and such things were usually to me a sealed book. Still, I was able to
describe a peculiar metallic throbbing.

“Record the time for the echo from it,” ordered Kennedy, thrusting the
stop watch into my hands. “Press it the instant you hear the return
sound after I push down the key. I want to be sure of it and eliminate
my own personal equation from the calculation. Are you ready?”

I nodded and an instant later, as he noted the time, I heard through
the oscillator the peculiar vibration I had felt when the key was
depressed. On the _qui vive_ I waited for the return echo. Sure
enough, there it was and I mechanically registered it on the watch.

“Five and thirty-hundredths seconds,” muttered Kennedy. “I had five and
thirty-five hundredths. It’s coming nearer――you hear the sound direct
again?”

I did, just a trifle more distinctly, and I said so.

Confirmed in his own judgment, Craig hastily turned to the student.
“Run up there to the boat-house,” he directed. “Have Riley call that
wireless operator on the telephone and tell him to get the _Sybarite_
on the wireless――if he hasn’t done it already. Then have him tell them
not to try to move the yacht under any circumstance――but for God’s sake
to get off it themselves――as quick as they can!”

“What’s the matter?” I asked, breathlessly. “What was that humming in
the oscillator?”

“The wireless destroyer――the telautomaton model――has been launched full
at the _Sybarite_,” Craig exclaimed. “You remember it was large enough,
even if it was only a model, to destroy a good-sized craft if it
carried a charge of high explosive. It has been launched and is being
directed from that fast cruiser back of the point.”

We looked at one another aghast. What could we do? There was a
sickening feeling of helplessness in the face of this new terror of the
seas.

“It――it has really been launched?” cried an agitated voice of a girl
behind us.

Paquita had pushed her way altogether through the crowd while we were
engrossed in listening through the submarine ear. She had heard what
Kennedy had just said and now stood before us, staring wildly.

“Oh,” she cried, frantically clasping her hands, “isn’t there
anything――anything that can stop it――that can save him?”

She was not acting now. There could be no doubt of the genuineness of
her anxiety, nor of whom the “him” meant. I wondered whether she might
have been directly or indirectly responsible, whether she was not now
repentant for whatever part she had played. At least she must be, as
far as Shelby Maddox was involved. Then I recollected the black looks
that Sanchez had given Shelby earlier in the evening. Was jealousy
playing a part as well as cupidity?

Kennedy had been busy, while the rest of us had been standing stunned.
Suddenly another light-bomb ricocheted over the water.

“Keep on sending them, one by one,” he ordered the student, who had
returned. “We’ll need all the light we can get.”

Over the shadowy waves we could now see the fine line of foam left by
the destroyer as it shot ahead swiftly.

Events were now moving faster than I can tell them. Kennedy glanced
about. On the opposite side of the float some one of the visitors
from the cottages to the dance at the Casino had left a trim hardwood
speedboat. Without waiting to inquire whose it was, Craig leaped into
it and spun the engine.

“The submarine ear has warned us,” he shouted, beckoning to Burke and
myself. “Even if we cannot save the yacht, we may save their lives!
Come on!”

We were off in an instant and the race was on――one of the most exciting
I have ever been in――a race between this speedy motor-boat and a
telautomatic torpedo to see which might get to the yacht first. Though
we knew that the telautomaton had had such a start before it was
discovered that we could not beat it, still there was always the hope
that its mechanism might slow down or break down.

Failing to get there first, there was always a chance of our being in
at the rescue.

In the penetrating light of the flare-bombs, as we approached closer
the spot in which Watkins was now dropping them regularly, we could
see the telautomaton, speeding ahead on its mission of death, its
wake like the path of a great man-eating fish. What would happen if it
struck I could well imagine.

Each of us did what he could to speed the motor. For this was a race
with the most terrible engine yet devised by American inventive genius.




                                  XXII

                            THE TELAUTOMATON


Devilishly, while the light-bombs flared, the telautomaton sped
relentlessly toward its mark.

We strained our eyes at the _Sybarite_. Would they never awake to their
danger? Was the wireless operator asleep or off duty? Would our own
operator be unable to warn them in time?

Then we looked back to the deadly new weapon of modern war science.
Nothing now could stop it.

Kennedy was putting every inch of speed into the boat which he had
commandeered.

“As a race it’s hopeless,” he gritted, bending ahead over the wheel
as if the boat were a thing that could be urged on. “What they are
doing is to use the Hertzian waves to actuate relays on the torpedo.
The wireless carries impulses so tuned that they release power carried
by the machine itself. The thing that has kept the telautomaton back
while wireless telegraphy has gone ahead so fast is that in wireless
we have been able to discard coherers and relays and use detectors and
microphones in their places. But in telautomatics you have to keep the
coherer. That has been the barrier. The coherer until recently has been
spasmodic, until we got the mercury steel disk coherer――and now this
one. See how she works――if only it could be working for us instead of
against us!”

On sped the destroyer. It was now only a matter of seconds when it
would be directed squarely at the yacht. In our excitement we shouted,
forgetting that it was of no use, that they would neither hear nor,
most likely, know what it was we meant.

Paquita’s words rang in my ears. Was there nothing that could be done?

Just then we saw a sailor rush frantically and haul in a boat that was
fastened to a boom extending from the yacht’s side.

Then another and another ran toward the first. They had realized
at last our warning was intended for them. The deck was now alive
and faintly over the water we could hear them shouting in frantic
excitement, as they worked to escape destruction coming at them now at
express train speed.

Suddenly there came a spurt of water, a cloud of spray, like a geyser
rising from the harbor. The _Sybarite_ seemed to be lifted bodily out
of the water and broken. Then she fell back and settled, bow foremost,
heeling over, as she sank down to the mud and ooze of the bottom. The
water closed over her and she was gone, nothing left but fragments of
spars and woodwork which had been flung far and wide.

Through my mind ran the terrible details I had read of ships torpedoed
without warning and the death and destruction of passengers. At least
there were no women and children to add to this horror.

Kennedy slowed down his engine as we approached the floating wreckage,
for there was not only the danger of our own frail little craft hitting
something and losing rudder or propeller, but we could not tell what
moment we might run across some of those on the yacht, if any had
survived.

Other boats had followed us by this time, and we bent all our energies
to the search, for pursuit of the scout cruiser was useless. There was
not a craft in the harbor capable of overtaking one of her type, even
in daylight. At night she was doubly safe from pursuit.

There was only one thing that we might accomplish――rescue. Would
we be in time, would we be able to find Shelby? As my mind worked
automatically over the entire swift succession of events of the past
few days I recalled every moment we had been observing him, every
action. I actually hated myself now for the unspoken suspicion of him
that I had entertained. I could see that, though Kennedy had been
able to promise him nothing openly, he had in reality been working in
Shelby’s real interests.

There flashed through my mind a picture of Winifred. And at the same
time the thought of what this all meant to her brought to me forcibly
the events of the night before. One attack after another had been
leveled against us, starting with the following and shooting at
Hastings at our very laboratory door. Burke had been attacked. Then had
come the attack on Kennedy, which had miscarried and struck me. Death
had been leveled even at Mito, as though he had possessed some great
secret. Next had come the attempted abduction of Winifred Walcott. And
at last it had culminated in the most spectacular attack of all, on
Shelby himself.

Try as I could by a process of elimination, I was unable to fix the
guilt on any one in particular, even yet. Fixing guilt, however, was
not what was needed now.

We had come into the area of the floating debris, and the possibility
of saving life was all that need concern us. In the darkness I could
make out cries, but they were hard to locate.

We groped about, trying hard to cover as much area as possible, but
at the same time fearful of defeating our own purposes by striking
some one with bow or propeller of our speed boat. Every now and then a
piece of the wreckage would float by and we would scan it anxiously in
mingled fear and hope that it would assume a human form as it became
more clearly outlined. Each time that we failed we resumed the search
with desperate determination.

“Look!” cried Burke, pointing at a wooden skylight that seemed to
have been lifted from the deck and cast but into the waves, the glass
broken, but the frame nearly intact. “What’s that on it?”

Kennedy swung the boat to port and we came alongside the dark, bobbing
object.

It was the body of a man.

With a boat-hook Craig hauled the thing nearer and we leaned over the
side and together pulled the limp form into our boat.

As we laid him on some cushions on the flooring, our boat drifted clear
and swung around so that the flare shone in his face. He stirred and
groaned, but did not relax the grip of his fingers still clenched after
we had torn them loose from the skylight grating.

It was Shelby Maddox――terribly wounded, but alive.

Others of the crew were floating about, and we set to work to get them,
now aided by the volunteer fleet that had followed us out. When it was
all over we found that all had been accounted for so far, except the
engineer and one sailor.

Just at present we had only one thought in mind. Shelby Maddox must
be saved, and to be saved he must be rushed where there was medical
assistance.

Shouting orders to those who had come up to continue the search,
Kennedy headed back toward the town of Westport.

The nearest landing was the town dock at the foot of the main street,
and toward this Craig steered.

There was no emergency hospital, but one of the bystanders volunteered
to fetch a doctor, and it was not long before Shelby was receiving the
attention he needed so badly.

He had been badly cut about the head by flying glass, and the explosion
had injured him internally, how serious could not be determined,
although two of his ribs had been broken. Only his iron will and
athletic training had saved him, for he was weak, not only from the
loss of blood, but from water which he had been unable to avoid
swallowing.

The doctor shook his head gravely over him, but something had to be
done, even though it was painful to move him. He could not lie there in
an open boat.

Kennedy settled the matter quickly. From a tenant who lived over a
store near the waterfront he found where a delivery wagon could be
borrowed. Using a pair of long oars and some canvas, we improvised a
stretcher which we slung from the top of the wagon and so managed to
transport Shelby to the Harbor House, avoiding the crowd of curious
onlookers at the main entrance, and finally depositing him in the bed
in the room which he usually occupied.

The pain from his wounds was intense, but he managed to keep up his
nerve until we reached the hotel. Then he collapsed.

As we tried to help the doctor to bring him around I feared that the
injury and the shock might have proved fatal.

“Pretty serious,” muttered the doctor, in answer to my anxious inquiry,
“but I think he’ll pull through it. Call up Main 21. There’s a trained
nurse summering at the house. Get her down.”

I hastened to do so and had hardly finished when Kennedy came over to
me.

“I think we ought to notify his sister,” he remarked. “See if you can
get Mrs. Walcott on the house ’phone.”

I called, but the voice that answered was not that of Frances Walcott.
It took me a few seconds before I realized that it was Winifred
Walcott, and I covered up the transmitter as I turned to Kennedy to
tell him and ask what he wanted me to do.

“Let me talk to her,” decided Craig. “I think I won’t let events take
their course any longer. She can be the best nurse for Shelby――if she
will.”

Craig had evidently prepared to break the news gently to her, but, as
nearly as I could make out, it was not necessary. She had already heard
what had happened.

“No,” I heard him say, as if in answer to an anxious question from her.
“He is seriously hurt, to be sure, but the doctor says that with proper
nursing he will pull through.”

I did not hear the reply, of course, but I recognized the appeal hidden
in Kennedy’s answer, as he waited.

“Just a moment,” I heard him say next.

His forehead wrinkled as he listened to something, evidently trying to
make it out. Then he said, suddenly: “I think I had better say no more
over the telephone, Miss Walcott. Some one is listening to us.”

An angry look flashed over his face, but his voice showed no anger as
he said good-by and hung up.

“What was it?” I asked. “What did she do?”

“It wasn’t Miss Walcott,” he replied, scowling. “You heard me say that
some one was listening? Well, just as I said it there came a laugh over
the wire from somewhere, and a voice cut in, ‘Yes, there is some one
listening. You haven’t caught me yet, Kennedy――and you won’t.’ I said
good-by after that. Oh, have no fear about Miss Walcott.”

Kennedy was right. It seemed an incredibly short time when there came a
light tap on the door and he sprang to open it.

“Can I――be of any assistance?” pleaded a softly tremulous voice.
“Perhaps I――could play at nursing?”

Kennedy glanced at the doctor and the figure lying so quietly on the
bed, then at the girl, and decided. She had hesitated not a moment,
when she had heard how close Shelby was to death, but had hurried to
him. He opened the door and she entered softly, tiptoeing toward the
bed.

It must have been by some telepathic influence that Shelby, who had
a moment before been scarcely conscious, felt her presence. She had
scarcely whispered a word to the doctor, as she bent over him, but he
opened his eyes, caught just a glimpse of her face, and seemed to drink
it in as his eyes rested on the bunch of flowers she was wearing――his
flowers, which he had sent her.

He smiled faintly. Not even by a word or look was any reference made to
their misunderstanding. It was a strange meeting, but it seemed that
the very atmosphere had changed. Even the doctor noticed it. In spite
of his pain, Shelby had brightened visibly.

“I don’t think we need that nurse,” whispered the doctor to Kennedy,
with an understanding glance. “What was that you said about some one
listening over the telephone? Who could it have been?”

The doctor said it in a low enough tone, but it seemed that Maddox’s
senses must have been suddenly made more acute by the coming of
Winifred.

He had reached out, weakly but unhesitatingly, and had placed his hand
on hers as it rested on his pillows. At the mention of the telephone
he turned toward us with an inquiring look. It seemed to recall to his
mind something that had been on it before the accident.

“Some one――listening,” he repeated, more to himself than to us.

Winifred looked inquiringly at us, too, but said nothing.

Kennedy tried to pass the thing over, but the doctor’s remark seemed to
have started some train of thought in Shelby’s mind, which could not be
so easily stopped.

“Some one――pounding Maddox Munitions,” he murmured, brokenly, as if
feeling his way through a maze. “Now I’m out――they’ll succeed. What can
I do? How can I hold up the market?”

He repeated the last two questions as though turning them over in his
mind and finding no answer.

Evidently he was talking about his operations in the market which had
been so puzzling to Hastings as well as ourselves. I was about to say
something that would prompt him to go on with his revelation, when
Kennedy’s look halted me. Apparently he did not wish to interfere with
the train of thought the doctor’s remark had started, inasmuch as it
had been started now.

“Some one――listening――over the telephone,” strove Shelby again.
“Yes――how can I do it? No more secrecy――laid up here――I’ll have to use
the telephone. Will those Broad Street brokers take orders over long
distance? Everybody will know――what I’m doing. They’ll delay――play me
for a sucker. What am I to do?”

It was evident now what Shelby had been doing, at least in part. The
tragedy to his brother had quite naturally depressed the stock of the
company. Indeed, with Marshall Maddox, its moving spirit, gone, it was
no wonder that many holders had begun to feel shaky. Once that feeling
began to become general, the stock, which had had a meteoric rise
lately along with other war stocks, would begin to sag and slump sadly.
There was no telling where it would stop if once the downward trend
began.

As I looked at the young man I felt a new respect for him. Even though
I had not a much clearer idea than at the start of how or by whom
Marshall Maddox had been killed, still I do not think any of us had
believed that Shelby was capable of seeing such a crisis so clearly
and acting upon what he saw. Evidently it was in his blood, bred in
the Maddox nature. He was a great deal more clever than any of us had
suspected. Not only had he realized the judgment of outsiders about
himself, but had taken advantage of it. In keeping the stock up, if
it had been known that it was he who was doing it, it would not have
counted for half what it did when the impression prevailed that the
public was doing it, or even some hazy financial interest determined
to maintain the price. Both possibilities had been discussed by the
market sharps. It had never seemed to occur to them that Shelby Maddox
might be using his personal fortune to bolster up what was now in
greater measure his own company.

For a moment we looked blankly at Kennedy. Then Shelby began to talk
again.

“Suppose the bear raid continues?” he murmured. “I must meet it――I
must!”

The doctor leaned over to Craig. “He can’t go on that way,” he
whispered. “It will use up his strength in worry.”

Kennedy was thinking about that, too, as he considered the very
difficult situation the telautomaton attack had placed Shelby in. It
was more than a guess that the attack had been carefully calculated.
Some one else, perhaps some hidden group, was engaged in taking
advantage of the death of Marshall Maddox in one way, Shelby in another.

As for Shelby, here he was, helpless, at the Harbor House. Surrounded
by spies, as he seemed to be, what could he do? Every message in and
out of the hotel was most likely tapped. To use the telephone was like
publishing abroad one’s secrets.

Kennedy moved over quietly to the bedside, as Winifred looked
appealingly at him, as much as to say, “Isn’t there something you can
do to quiet him?”

He bent down and took Shelby’s hand.

“Oh――it’s you, Kennedy――is it?” wandered Shelby, not quite clear yet
where he was, in the fantasy of impressions that crowded his mind since
the accident. “I asked you to work with me once. You said you would
play fair.”

“I will,” repeated Kennedy, “as far as the interests of my client go,
I will give you every assistance. But if you are to do anything at all
to-morrow, you must rest to-night.”

“Have I――have I been talking?” queried Shelby, as though in doubt
whether he had been thinking to himself or aloud.

Kennedy ignored the question. “You need rest,” he said, simply. “Let
the doctor fix you up now. In the morning――well, to-morrow will be
another day.”

Shelby passed his hand wearily over his aching head. He was too weak to
argue.

While the doctor prepared a mild opiate Kennedy and I quietly withdrew
into the next room.

“Professor Kennedy――_won’t_ you help us?” pleaded Miss Walcott, who had
followed. “Surely something can be done.”

I could not help noticing that she said “us,” not “him.” As I watched
her the scene on the float, hours before, flashed over me. There
another woman, under quite different circumstances, had made the same
appeal. Where did Paquita fit into the scheme of things? Two women had
been striving over Shelby’s life. Did one represent his better nature,
the other his worse?

Kennedy looked frankly at Winifred Walcott.

“You will trust me?” he asked in a low tone.

“Yes,” she said, simply, meeting his eyes in turn.

“Then when the nurse arrives,” he directed, “get some rest. I shall
need you to-morrow.”




                                 XXIII

                            THE CURB MARKET


“It’s impossible to trace all the telephone lines back,” considered
Kennedy, thinking still of the eavesdropping, as we met Burke again
down-stairs. “Perhaps if we begin at the other end, and follow the
wires from the point where they enter the building to the switchboard,
we may find something. If we don’t, then we shall have to work harder,
that’s all.”

With the aid of Burke, who had ways of getting what he wanted from the
management of anything, from a bank to a hotel, we succeeded in getting
down into the cellar quietly.

Kennedy began by locating the point in the huge cellar of the Lodge
where the wires of the two telephones, 100 and 101 Main, entered
underground, that system having been adopted so as to avoid unsightly
wires outside the hotel.

Carefully Craig began a systematic search as he followed the two lines
to the point underneath the switchboard up-stairs. So far nothing
irregular had been apparent.

Craig looked up perplexed, and I feared that he was about to say that
the search must be continued wherever the wires led through the house,
a gigantic and almost impossible task.

Instead, he was looking at a little dark store-room that was near the
point where we were standing. He walked over to it curiously and peered
in. Then he struck a match. In the flickering light we could see a
telephone receiver and a little switchboard standing beside it.

For a moment his hand hesitated on the receiver, as though he were
afraid that by taking it off the hook it might call or alarm somebody.
Finally he seemed to decide that unless something were risked nothing
would be gained. He took the receiver deliberately and held it up to
his ear.

“Do you hear anything?” I asked.

He shook his head as if to discourage conversation. Then he changed the
plugs and listened again. Several times he repeated it. At last he kept
the plugs in for some time, while we waited in the darkness, in silence.

“Evidently some one has tapped the regular telephone wires,” he said to
us at length, “and has run extensions to this little switchboard in
the store-room, prepared to overhear almost anything that goes on over
either set of wires that come in. And they have done more. They must
have tampered with the switchboard up-stairs. Just now I heard the girl
call Shelby’s room. The doctor answered. That trained nurse has arrived
and Miss Walcott has gone to her room as she promised. We can’t take
the time to trace out how it is done, and besides it is too dark at
night to do it, anyhow. Shelby was right.”

For a moment Kennedy tried to puzzle the thing out, as though
determining what was the best course to pursue. Then he stooped down
and began picking up even the burnt matches he had dropped.

“Don’t disturb a thing,” he said to Burke. “We must circumvent this
scheme. Has the last train back to the city gone?”

Burke looked at his watch. “Yes, unfortunately,” he nodded.

“Then I’ll have to send some one back to the city to my laboratory by
automobile,” continued Kennedy. “I can’t wait until morning, for we
shall have to go to the city then. There’s that student of mine――but
he’s pretty tired.”

“I can get a car and a fresh driver for him,” remarked Burke. “Perhaps
he could doze off during the ride. How would that do?”

“It will have to do,” decided Kennedy. “Get the car.”

We went back up-stairs by the way of the kitchen to avoid suspicion,
and while Burke hunted up a car and driver Kennedy found Watkins and
gave him detailed instructions about what he wanted.

“I calculate that it will take him at least four hours to go and get
back,” remarked Kennedy, a few minutes later. “There isn’t anything we
can do yet. I think we had better get a little rest, for I anticipate a
strenuous time to-morrow.”

We passed through the lobby. There was Sanchez, talking to the night
clerk.

“I was down on the dock in front of the Casino when the explosion
came,” we could hear him telling the clerk. “Yes, _sir_, it’s a wonder
any of them were saved.”

“What did you think of that?” queried Burke, in the elevator. “A crude
attempt at an alibi?”

Kennedy shrugged non-committally.

“I think I’ll have Riley watch him until he goes to bed,” continued
the Secret Service man. “I can telephone down from the room. No one is
listening now, at least.”

“By all means,” agreed Craig.

Tired though we were, I do not think we slept very much as we waited
for the return of the car from New York. Still, we were at least
resting, although to me the hours seemed to pass as a shifting
phantasmagoria of fire-balls and explosions strangely blended with the
faces of the two beautiful women who had become the chief actresses
in the little drama. From one very realistic dream in which I saw
Winifred, Paquita, Irene Maddox, and Frances Walcott all fantastically
seated as telephone operators and furiously ringing Shelby’s bell, I
woke with a start to find that it was our own bell ringing and that
Kennedy was answering it.

“The car is back from the city,” he said to me. “You needn’t get up. I
can do this job alone.”

There was no sleep for me, however, I knew, and with a final yawn I
pulled myself together and joined Craig and Burke in the hall as we
went down-stairs as quietly as we could.

Riley had left a hastily scribbled report in the letter-box for Burke,
saying that Sanchez had done nothing further suspicious, but had gone
to bed. Paquita was in her room. Winifred, Mr. and Mrs. Walcott, Irene
Maddox, and all the rest were present and accounted for, and he had
decided on resting, too.

Kennedy sent Watkins off to bed, after taking from him the things he
had brought back from the city, and the early morning, just as it was
beginning to lighten a bit, found us three again in the cellar.

Kennedy carefully reconnoitered the store-room where the telephone
outfit had been placed. It was deserted, and he set to work quickly.
First he located the wires that represented the number 100 Main and
connected them with what looked very much like a seamless iron tube,
perhaps six inches long and three inches in diameter. Then he connected
in a similar manner the other end of the tube with the wires of Main
101.

“This is a special repeating coil of high efficiency,” he explained to
Burke, whom he was instructing, as it occurred to him, just what he
wanted done later. “It is absolutely balanced as to resistance, number
of turns, everything. I shall run this third line from the coil itself
outside and up-stairs through Shelby’s window. Before I go to the city
I want you to see that the local telephone company keeps a couple of
wires to the city clear for us. I’ll get them on the wire and explain
the thing, if you’ll use your authority at this end of the line.”

In spite of the risk of disturbing Shelby Maddox, Kennedy finished
leading the wires from the coil up to his room and placed a telephone
set on a table near the bed. Then he carefully concealed the tube in
the cellar so that under ordinary circumstances no one could find it
or even guess that anything had been done with the two trunk lines.

Shelby was resting quietly under an opiate and the nurse was watching
faithfully. I did not hear Kennedy’s instructions entirely, but I
remember he said that Burke was to be allowed into the outer room and
that Shelby Maddox and Winifred were to talk only over the new line as
he would later direct.

Again we retired to our rooms, and I fell asleep listening to Kennedy
instruct Burke minutely in something which I think was just as much
Greek to the Secret Service man as it was to me. Kennedy saw that it
was and wrote down what he had already said, to make doubly sure.

My sleep was dreamless this time, for I was thoroughly tired. Whether
Kennedy slept I do not know, but I suspect that he did not, for when
he was conducting a case he seemed unable to rest as long as there was
something over which he could work or think.

It seemed almost no time before Kennedy roused me. He was already
dressed――in fact, I don’t think he had taken time for more than a
change of linen.

A hasty bite of breakfast and we were again on the first accommodation
train that went into the city in the cool gray dawn, leaving Burke
with instructions to keep us informed of anything important that he
discovered.

No one for whom we cared saw us leave and we had the satisfaction of
knowing that we should be in the city and at work long before any
one probably knew it. That was a quality of Kennedy’s vigilance and
sleeplessness.

“It’s just as important to guard against prying ears at this end of
the line as the other,” remarked Kennedy, after hurriedly mapping out
a course for ourselves, which included, first of all, calling out of
bed an officer of the telephone company with whom he was intimately
acquainted and whom he could therefore afford to take into his
confidence.

Without a moment’s more delay we hurried down-town from the railroad
station.

Shelby Maddox had given Craig the names of two Curb brokers with whom
he was dealing in confidence, for, although Maddox Munitions was being
traded in largely, it was still a Curb market stock and not listed on
the big exchange.

“They are in the same building on Broad Street,” remarked Kennedy as
we left the Subway at the Wall Street station and took the shortest
cuts through the basements of several tall buildings in the financial
district. “And I don’t trust either one of them any farther than I can
see him.”

It was very early, and comparatively few people were about. Craig,
however, managed to find the janitor of the building where the brokers’
offices were――a rather old structure overlooking that point where Broad
Street widens out and has been seized on by that excited, heterogeneous
collection of speculators who gather daily in a corner roped off from
traffic, known as the Curb market. From the janitor he learned that
there was one small office in the front of the building for rent at a
seemingly prohibitive rate. It was no time to haggle over money, and
Kennedy laid down a liberal deposit for the use of the room.

His tentative arrangements with the janitor had scarcely been completed
when two men from the telephone company arrived. Into our new and
unfurnished office Craig led them, while the janitor, for another fee,
agreed to get us a flat-topped desk and some chairs.

“Whatever we do,” began Craig in a manner that inspired enthusiasm,
“must be done quickly. You have the orders of the company to go ahead.
There’s one line that runs into the office of Dexter & Co., on the
second floor, another to Merrill & Moore on the fourth. I want you to
locate the wires, cut in on them, and run the cut-in extensions to
this office. It’s not a wire-tapping game, so you need have no fear
that there will be any come-back on what you do.”

While the telephone men were busy locating the two sets of wires,
Kennedy laid out on the desk which the janitor brought up on the
freight elevator a tube and coil similar to that which I had already
seen him employ at Westport.

Though the telephone men were as clever as any that the official of the
company could have sent, it was a complicated task to locate the wires
and carry out the instructions that Kennedy had given, and it took
much longer than he had anticipated. At least, it seemed long, in our
excited frame of mind. Every minute counted now, for the advance guard
of office boys, stenographers and clerks had already begun to arrive at
the offices in preparation for the work of the day.

We had fortunately been able to start early enough so that that part
of the work which would have excited comment was already done before
the office workers arrived. As for the rest, on the surface it appeared
only as though some one had rented the vacant office and had been able
to hurry the telephone company along in installing its service.

There was no difficulty about connecting up our own regular telephone,
and as soon as it was done Kennedy hastened to call Westport and the
Lodge on long distance.

“Shelby has awakened much improved after his night’s rest,” he
announced, after a rapid-fire conversation. “Miss Walcott is with him
now, as well as the nurse. I think we can depend on Burke to handle
things properly out there. It’s an emergency and we’ll have to take
chances. I don’t blame Shelby for feeling impatient and wishing he
could be here. But I told the doctor that as long as things were as
they are he had better humor his patient by giving him an outlet for
his excitement than to keep him fuming and eating his heart out in bed,
helpless. Between Winifred and ourselves we ought to keep him occupied.”

I do not think that the telephone men had the faintest idea what it was
that Kennedy was planning to do, and I am quite sure that I did not.
For, in addition to the outfit like that at Westport, he now laid on
the table a peculiar arrangement. It seemed to consist of a metal base,
which he placed near the telephone receiver. From the base three prongs
reached up, and there was attached to it on one side one of those
little flat, watch-case receivers such as are used on office telephones.

It was getting late, and Kennedy and the men from the telephone
company were working as rapidly as possible, testing and adjusting the
connections he had caused to be made.

As I stood by the window, watching the gathering crowd below, I
suddenly realized that the market had opened.

It was as Kennedy had expected. Pandemonium seemed to reign on the
Curb. Buyers and sellers crowded and elbowed one another, wildly
shouting and gesticulating. From the thick of what looked like a
huge free-for-all fight orders and sales were relayed by word of
mouth to clerks standing on the sidewalk, who in turn shouted them to
other clerks in the windows of our own building or others about, or
despatched messengers to offices farther away. It was a curious sight,
and one never to be forgotten.

Passers-by stopped on both sides of the street to look and listen to
the struggling mob, and I soon saw that even the usually electrified
atmosphere of the Curb was this morning more than ordinarily surcharged
with excitement. Far above all the noise and bustle I made out that
there had been overnight a veritable flood of orders from weak holders,
as well as others, to sell Maddox Munitions. It was not the weak
holders we feared so much as the hidden “others” who were seeking to
manipulate the stock.

Our telephone rang and Craig answered it, while the men still worked on
the new line. It was Shelby. He had called up his brokers and had heard
of the market opening.

“Not quite ready yet,” hastened Kennedy. “Go ahead and place your
orders over the regular wire with the brokers. I’ll let you know when
we’re ready and what to do. Don’t worry.”

Kennedy had stationed me now permanently at the window to report what
was happening below. From my eery point of vantage I could now see that
the first flood of selling orders was receding, as Shelby’s brokers
wormed their way in and now and then snapped up a lot of stock offered
for sale. The buying momentarily seemed to stiffen the price which
before had threatened to toboggan.

Yet no sooner had the buying begun than it seemed as if other blocks
of stock were brought up for sale. It was, for all the world, like
a gigantic battle in which forces were hurled here and there, with
reinforcements held in reserve to be loosed at just the right moment.
Who was back of it?

Gradually, in spite of the large purchases which Shelby had made, the
price of the stock worked its way down. I began to understand something
of what was going on. Actually it seemed as though every time there
was an order to buy, coming from either Dexter or Merrill & Moore,
there was a corresponding new order to sell by some other broker.
Thousands of shares were thus being dumped on the market, recklessly,
relentlessly.

It looked as though some one was “wise.” Were the brokers with whom
Shelby was dealing straight? I said as much to Kennedy, but he merely
shook his head and plunged into work deeper.

One after another blocks of stock appeared for sale. There could be
no doubt now that there was a carefully planned quick assault being
made at the very opening of trading to take people by surprise at the
suddenness of the bear raid.

More and more frenzied became the selling and buying. I could imagine
the strain that it placed on Shelby, miles away, forced to take only
the reports that his brokers sent him, and to fling back other and
larger orders to buy.

As the trading progressed it became evident that the offerings of stock
were coming with more surprising regularity. The more I observed the
more I was convinced that there was some collusion here. It was not
chance. Some one was informed of each move of Shelby’s, even before it
could be executed, was enabled to prepare for it, to meet it with a
decided advantage. It was a game being played for high stakes, but as
far as Shelby was concerned, the cards were stacked and marked.

Our telephone rang insistently and Kennedy answered it. It was from
Dexter. They were feeling shaky and worried.

Our door opened and a clerk from the Merrill & Moore firm entered.
He was suave and polite. But back of it all could be discovered the
eagerness to stand from under a possible crash.

“You will readily understand,” the broker hinted, “that under the
circumstances we cannot continue to take Mr. Maddox’s orders over the
telephone indefinitely. Suppose he should repudiate some of them? Where
would we find ourselves?”

Kennedy glanced at the two telephone men, one of whom had straightened
up and was watching the other.

“I understand,” he said, simply, a grim smile flickering about his
mouth. “Just a moment, sir. Walter――keep Dexter on this wire.”

Below on the street I could hear the babel of voices. I knew what it
meant. At both ends of Shelby’s telephone line were traitors. A panic
in the stock was not only threatened. It was here.

Maddox Munitions was on the verge of collapse!




                                  XXIV

                          THE PHANTOM CIRCUIT


I looked at Kennedy in despair. He was not even perturbed. It was for
just this moment that he had hurried to New York and had worked so
intensely.

Over the telephone that I was holding, Dexter himself politely informed
us that he had reached a point where orders from Mr. Maddox to be
filled must have some more binding force than word of mouth over the
telephone.

“Tell him to wait just a moment,” directed Kennedy, turning to the
other broker who had come to us. “Will you, sir, tell Mr. Merrill to
step down to the office of Mr. Dexter? I shall be there in a moment
myself. Walter,” he added, calmly, “ring Dexter off. Get Shelby Maddox
and tell him to use the new wire connections.”

I did as I was told. Even over the telephone I could feel that the
strain was telling on Shelby’s shattered strength. His voice was shaky
as he inquired thickly for news. I shouted something encouraging back,
and urged him to get on the other wire, at which, at our end, Kennedy
was already impatiently waiting.

A moment later I heard Kennedy and Shelby exchange a few words. Shelby
was evidently much alarmed over the sudden turn of events.

As I waited, I saw Kennedy jam the receiver down on the little metal
base. The three prongs, reaching upward, engaged the receiver tightly,
fitting closely about it. Then he took the small disk receiver from its
hook and placed it to his ear instead of the regular one.

I wondered what it all meant. Craig’s face showed that, whatever it
was, it was most important.

“Yes,” I heard him call back, “give whatever orders you want now to
me. I will see that they are delivered. Pay no attention to the other
telephone. Let it ring――until I tell you. Go ahead.”

Evidently Shelby was giving orders for stock up to the limit of his
resources that were available.

For a moment there evidently came a pause in what was being said over
the telephone at the Westport end, and Kennedy gazed impatiently about
the room.

“What good will that do?” I objected, seeing that Kennedy was not
occupied. “Don’t you suppose they’ll hear what is said over this line,
too? We know they’ve cut in on the two trunk lines at the Harbor House,
and there is every reason to suppose that some one taps the brokers’
wires here――unless the brokers are crooks, too. They’ll know what
Shelby is going to do.”

Kennedy shook his head. “No,” he replied, calmly, “no outsider knows a
thing about this. You see, I’m not using any ordinary means to prepare
against the expert who has brought this situation about. The messages
that I am receiving are coming over what we call the ‘phantom circuit.’”

“‘The phantom circuit?’” I repeated, mystified.

“Yes. It seems fantastic at first, I suppose,” he pursued, “but, after
all, it is in accordance with the laws of electricity. They know
nothing and they cannot cut us off or interfere. You see, I am taking
advantage of the fact that additional telephones or so-called phantom
lines can be superposed on existing physical lines. It is possible to
obtain a third circuit from two similar metallic circuits by using for
each side of this third circuit the two wires of each of the other
circuits in multiple. All three circuits are independent, too.”

He was growing more and more impatient. Apparently there was some delay
at the other end.

“The third telephone current,” he went on, hurriedly, covering up his
nervousness by talking about his machine, “enters the wires of the
first circuit, as it were, and returns along the wires of the second
circuit. There are several ways of doing it. One is to use retardation
or choke-coils, bridged across the two metallic circuits at both
ends, with taps taken from the middle points of each. But the better
method, I think, is the one you have seen me install. I have introduced
repeating coils into the circuits at both ends. Technically, the third
circuit is then taken off from the mid-points of the secondaries
or line windings of these repeating coils. I don’t know what’s the
matter,” he added, calling vainly for Shelby Maddox. “Oh, all right.
Yes, I’ll wait. But hurry, please.”

I could appreciate Kennedy’s eagerness, for below on the street the
tumult was rising.

“It’s working all right,” he reassured. “I suppose you know that the
current on a long-distance line is alternating in character, and it
passes readily through a repeating coil. The only effect it has on
the transmission is slightly reducing the volume. The current passes
into the repeating coil, then divides and passes through the two line
wires. At the other end, the halves balance, so to speak. Thus currents
passing over a phantom circuit don’t set up currents in the terminal
apparatus of the side circuits. Consequently, a conversation carried
on over the phantom circuit will not be heard on either side circuit,
nor does a conversation on one side circuit affect the phantom. You get
three messages at once on two sets of wires. We can all talk at once
without interfering with one another.”

At any other time I should have been more than interested, but just now
the delay was galling. “What’s the trouble?” I inquired.

Kennedy shook his head. “Shelby is talking to Winifred about something.
I can hear only a word now and then. But he said it was important
and asked me to hold the wire. Evidently she wants to do something
he doesn’t want her to do. Yes――hello――yes, this is Kennedy. Say,
you’ll have to―― Oh, good morning, Miss Walcott. Yes, fine. What?
Why――certainly――if he says so, you may. That’s right. Go right ahead. I
am attending to everything at this end now.”

A moment later when Craig restored the telephone to its normal
condition he looked at me with a smile.

“Winifred Walcott is a trump!” he exclaimed, jumping up.

Just then our other telephone rang, and I answered it. “I’m down here
in Mr. Dexter’s office,” called a voice which I took to be that of
the other broker. “We have been talking the situation over. Of course,
if Mr. Maddox were here himself, you know,” he went on apologetically,
“it might be different. We could have him sign his name to orders,
but――really――well, you understand, under the circumstances――we feel,
both Mr. Dexter and myself, that we have gone about far enough.
It’s not that we question Mr. Maddox’s intentions in any way, you
understand, but――perhaps if he were on the ground, he might protect us
from loss, which he may not be able to do over the telephone. We’re
sorry, but――”

“Tell them I’ll be right down,” interjected Kennedy, sensing from my
look the tenor of what was being said.

I interrupted the broker at the first opportunity, then turned to
Kennedy. He had pulled from a compartment of the metal base a little
wax cylinder and dropped it into his pocket carefully.

“Come on,” he cried, dashing for the door and taking the stairs, not
even waiting for the elevator to come up.

A moment later we burst into the board room of the broker. Customers
were standing about in a high state of excitement, while the boys at
the board scurried about, replacing the figures on little bits of
green cardboard which fitted under the abbreviated names of the active
stocks listed on the board at one end of the room. Others were gathered
about the ticker, reading the words that the printed tape was pushing
forth. All seemed talking at once.

Kennedy did not pause, however, but walked unceremoniously into the
private office of Dexter. There already were several men representing
the two brokerage houses. Evidently they had been having a hasty
conference on what they should do in view of the situation in Maddox
Munitions.

I felt a sort of frigidity in the air as we entered. It was not that
anything was either said or done, but I have felt the same thing
several times when as a reporter it was my duty to be present at some
event that marked the freezing out of some person financially.

“Maddox Munitions,” began Dexter, clearing his throat with dignity,
“seems to have occasioned somewhat of a flurry on the market to-day in
which it is the chief sufferer itself. Our latest quotation shows that
it has declined steadily――two points, for instance since the quotation
before, and twenty-five under the opening of the market. I think you
will readily appreciate, Mr. Kennedy, our position in the matter.”

Before Kennedy could reply, however, another took up the conversation.
“Yes,” he remarked, “we have been observing the trend of events for the
last few days. Of course, we can readily appreciate the feeling of Mr.
Maddox in the matter, and, indeed, I must say that at the beginning I
thought that all that was necessary was a good strong show of buying
and that the run would end. Now, however, it begins to look as though
there were other factors entering in. You know the newspapers have
given a great deal of unpleasant notoriety to the Maddox family and
Maddox Munitions. Perhaps the general public does not like it. At least
it begins to seem as though even Mr. Shelby Maddox might not have the
resources to stem the tide.”

“This is Mr. Merrill, of Merrill & Moore, I believe?” asked Craig,
quietly, reminding them that in their suave haste they had forgotten to
introduce him.

“Yes,” returned Merrill, flushing a bit, for he was a great stickler
for punctilious etiquette, and his failure had betrayed the anxiety he
sought to conceal.

It was a ticklish situation and the brokers, always conservative, were
making it worse. Nor could one blame them. The case for the stock
looked at its darkest, verging rapidly on panic.

Kennedy knew it all just as well as they did. But he kept his coolness
admirably and never betrayed that he was doing a thing more than to
drive a bargain, whereas another might have given them an impression of
merely stalling for time.

As the downward trend continued, I saw that Craig was indeed
calculating how far he would let it go, as though one were letting
himself down a hill and testing just how little he needed to apply the
brakes not to have the car run away from him.

It seemed to nettle the brokers. They wanted to close the whole matter
up brusquely. Yet Kennedy’s commanding personality checked them. I felt
sure that they would even have ridden rough-shod over Shelby. Kennedy
was another matter.

Dexter rose decisively. “This must stop,” he frowned.

“I have orders from Mr. Maddox to buy shares――well, I shall not say
what it totals, but the first order is for ten thousand,” cut in
Kennedy, quietly.

There was a moment of silence during which the brokers looked at each
other, waiting for one to take the initiative.

“That is just the point,” began Merrill, finally. “You see, we have
been buying steadily for Mr. Maddox. If he had authorized us by
letter――or if he had handed us a check, certified――”

“But he could not well have foreseen this raid this morning,”
temporized Kennedy.

“True, no doubt. But it does not protect us. For example, where is your
authority, something, anything, that may be binding on him for this new
order of ten thousand shares?”

There was an air of triumph about the way he said the words. It was
evidently intended to be a poser, to leave Kennedy floored and flat.

“Authority?” repeated Craig, quietly, looking about. “I wonder whether
you have one of those dictating machines, a dictaphone, in the office?
Perhaps some one in the building has one.”

“We have one,” returned Dexter, still coldly. “I do not see how
anything you might dictate to it and which a stenographer might
transcribe would have any bearing on the question.”

“It would not,” agreed Kennedy, blithely. “That was not what I intended
to do. There is another use I wished to put it to. Ah――I see. May I use
this transcribing apparatus? Or better yet, would you gentlemen be so
kind as to listen to what I have here?”

He deliberately drew from his pocket the cylinder I had seen him detach
from the instrument up-stairs and slid it on in the proper place in
the new machine.

As it began to revolve I studied the faces about me, intent on
listening to what would be said.

“Is that good enough?” queried Kennedy. “It is a record on an
instrument devised for just this purpose with you brokers who wish to
hold your customers to an agreement over the telephone.”

The needle of the machine sputtered a bit as Craig added, “It is the
telescribe――a recent invention of Edison which records on a specially
prepared phonograph cylinder all that is said――both ways――over a
telephone wire. As nearly as I can make out some one――unknown――has been
playing animated telescribe in this case. Let us see now whether your
utmost demands for safety and security cannot be satisfied in this
modern way.”

Not a word was said. The novelty of the turn of events seemed to leave
them no objection.

In Shelby’s own voice came, clear and distinct, the order to buy ten
thousand shares of Maddox Munitions. Then Kennedy stopped the machine.

“Let us see how that works before we go any further,” he said,
significantly. “His buying orders seemed forestalled by selling orders
when they were given over the regular telephone. Before the next is
given perhaps we may find we have stopped part of the leak.”

Kennedy’s calm assurance seemed to have completely changed their
attitude. They were not convinced, but at least silent.

Out on the Curb we could hear the shouting as brokers with stock to
sell crowded about the man with the order to buy.

Whoever was back of it, it was a well-planned raid. The order for ten
thousand scarcely stemmed the flood. Quickly Kennedy let the little
cylinder revolve. Another order was placed, and another.

I could not help noticing, however, that each succeeding order was
smaller than the rest and it was hard to escape the implication that
Shelby was really reaching the limit of his available resources.

Anxiously I listened to the turmoil on the Curb. Now it would abate,
only to start up again. I glanced at Craig. What would he do?

Just then word was passed up that another block of stock had suddenly
been hurled on the market. The brokers looked skeptically at Kennedy.
Would Shelby be able to meet this final assault?

Craig released the revolving cylinder again. I gasped as I listened,
remembering the pause over the wire up-stairs, the apparent reluctance
of Shelby over something, and Craig’s remark that followed.

Winifred Walcott was placing orders――two of them――one to Dexter, the
other to Merrill & Moore. They were large orders, too, a great deal
larger than the selling order which had last bombarded the market. I
glanced at Kennedy. Not for a moment did he betray the anxiety I know
he now felt. For the orders must have involved a large part of Miss
Walcott’s own private fortune.

In his abstraction Kennedy had forgotten to stop the telescribe and I
heard over it another voice that sounded like Burke’s.

“Oh, say,” he announced. “I’ve got a clue on that store-room in the
cellar. I――”

“Never mind now, Burke,” I heard Kennedy answer over the telescribe.
“That will keep. Just now there isn’t a minute to spare.”

I heard no more, for Kennedy realized what he was doing and shut the
reproducer off, pulling off the recording cylinder.

Would Miss Walcott’s order be enough to turn the scale? The stock was
down. Her money would purchase more shares than before. If it did and
the stock rose, she stood to win. If it went lower she might lose all.

I jumped to the window again.

The news of the order, two orders, in fact, and large ones, came like a
bombshell on the overwrought market. Was the supporting power of Maddox
unlimited? One could feel the air tingle with the question. I saw some
speculators hold a hasty conference. Though I did not know it at the
time, they decided that an interest that could weather such an assault
could weather anything, that some one had been buying all the way down,
to boost back the stock far above the old high mark. They wanted to
share in the upward turn, and were ready to take a gambler’s chance.
Others caught the spirit, for if the Curb is anything it is a driven
herd.

Slowly the stock began to climb. The speculative public were in it now.
Selling orders almost fell off. Up jumped the price.

Kennedy drew a long breath as he pulled a Westport time-table from his
pocket, to cover his revulsion of feeling.

Maddox Munitions was saved!




                                  XXV

                            THE ADVENTURESS


There was no use in our staying longer in New York, for the turn in the
market had come, and it was able to take care of itself.

Up in our little office, Kennedy began hastily to pack up what of the
stuff he wanted to save, and was just finishing when the telephone rang.

It was Hastings, who had been trying to locate us all the morning. The
flurry in the market had very much excited him, and the final upward
turn had not served to decrease his excitement.

“There don’t seem to be many trains to Westport in the middle of the
day,” I heard Kennedy consider over the wire. “Your car is here? Well,
can you go back there with us? Yes――right away.”

As he hung up he turned to me. “Poor old Hastings hasn’t been able to
practise his profession for the last few days,” Craig smiled. “He wants
me to hurry up the case. We’ll see what we can do. He’s coming for us
in his car, and then we’ll shoot out to Westport.”

It was a beautiful day, but none of us appreciated it much as we slid
along the splendid roads from the city. There was only one subject
uppermost in my mind, at least. Whence had come this new stock-market
attack? Who was back of the series of violent deeds which had taken
place in less than a week? Above all, where were the precious
telautomaton plans?

At least it was some relief, when we swung into Westport, to know that
we were back again at the main scene of action, and I felt that now
events would develop rapidly.

Burke was waiting impatiently at the Lodge, though it did not seem as
though our arrival was the only thing he had on his mind.

“What was it you found in the little store-room in the cellar?”
demanded Kennedy, jumping from the car as we pulled up at the Lodge
porte-cochère.

Without comment, Burke pulled a crumpled bit of paper from his pocket
and handed it to Craig. We crowded around and read:

     If a hair of her head is harmed I will have revenge, though
     it sends me to prison for life.

We looked at the Secret Service man inquiringly.

“Not a soul has been near the store-room since we began to watch
it this morning,” he explained, hurriedly. “It must have been left
there before we got up――just tucked under the telephone instrument.
Paquita’s disappeared!”

“Disappeared?” we exclaimed, almost together, as Burke blurted out his
startling budget of news.

“Yes――and not a trace of her. She must have got away before you fellows
were up.”

I looked again at the crumpled bit of paper. What did it mean? Was it
that some one had actually kicked over the traces in working for one
higher up?

To whom did it refer? Instantly there flashed through my mind the
picture of Winifred as we had seen her borne off by the abductors whom
we had foiled. Could it be she?

Taught by Kennedy, I did not allow a first impression to rule. Might it
be any one else? I thought of Irene Maddox, of Frances Walcott. It did
not seem to fit them.

Paquita? Perhaps the note referred to her. If so, who would have sent
it? Sanchez? And if from Sanchez, to whom was it sent?

“How about Sanchez?” I queried.

“As much surprised at her disappearance as the rest of us,” replied
Burke.

“How was that?”

“I picked him up and had him shadowed. I know that her disappearance
mystified him, for he had no idea he was observed, at the time. He
got away again, though. If we are ever to pick that girl up again,
shadowing Sanchez may be the best way. I have had Riley out――”

“Not the same hand that wrote the cipher,” interrupted Kennedy,
studying the note. “I beg pardon. What of Riley? Any word?”

“I should say,” burst out Burke. “Down in the cove――Little Neck
they call it――in a deserted barn we’ve found a racer――answers the
description of the one seen in New York the morning of the robbery and
on the road out here. It’s my dope that you made the little garage here
untenable, Kennedy, and that whoever it was took the car to the cove to
hide it.”

He paused, but not for want of something to say. Before we could urge
him he added, “And that scout cruiser, too. She’s been scuttled, out
past the point, at the entrance to the cove. Whoever it is, he’s been
wiping out all the evidence against him that he can.”

“No word of Paquita or Sanchez?” inquired Kennedy again.

Burke shook his head.

“How is Shelby Maddox?”

“Much better. I was in the room during the flurry. You should have
seen him when the turn came. We could hardly keep him in bed. He was
frantic.”

Kennedy had continued studying the anonymous note very carefully as we
talked.

“It squares with my theory,” he mused, more to himself than to us.
“Yes――it is time to act. And we must act quickly. Burke, can you get
all the Maddoxes up to Shelby’s room――right away? Perhaps by that time
we may have word from Riley. At any rate, we shall be ready.”

Shelby was propped up in bed with pillows, quite reconciled now to
being an invalid, when we entered.

“The best little nurse ever,” he greeted us, scarcely taking his eyes
from Winifred. “And a financier, too,” he added, with a laugh; “a power
in the market.”

“You mustn’t forget Professor Kennedy’s machine,” put in Winifred,
welcoming us with a smile that covered the trace of a blush which
glowed through the pretty tan of her cheeks.

Shelby grasped Craig’s hand. “You said you wouldn’t work for me,” he
grinned, “but you certainly didn’t work against me. Just let me get on
my feet again. You won’t regret, old man, that you――”

A knock on the door cut him short. It was Frances and Johnson Walcott.

For a moment the two women looked at each other. Not a word was said,
but each understood. Whatever differences had kept them apart seemed
to have been swept aside by the emotions of the moment. Frances
whispered something in Winifred’s ear as she flung her arms about the
girl, then turned to her brother and bent over him.

Man-like, Johnson Walcott stood awkwardly. His wife saw it.

“Congratulate them, Johnson,” she cried. “Don’t you understand?”

Before he could reply there came another tap on the door. It was Burke
again, escorting Irene Maddox, reluctant and suspicious.

Surprised, she glanced from the Walcotts to Shelby, then at us.

“Congratulate whom?” she asked, quickly. “What is it all about?”

There was a moment of embarrassment, when Kennedy came to the rescue,
stepping forward and looking at his watch.

“I’m waiting word from Señorita Paquita and Mr. Sanchez,” he
interrupted, “but that is no reason why I should not at least begin to
tell you what I have discovered.”

We watched him as he slowly drew from his pocket the crumpled note
which Burke had discovered that morning, and the apparently blank sheet
of paper we had picked up in Paquita’s room.

It seemed as if Kennedy’s words had recalled them all to their former
selves. In an instant each seemed to be on guard, even Shelby.

“I suppose you have heard of what we call the science of graphology?”
he inquired, motioning in pantomime to me to fill a basin with warm
water. “It is the reading of character in handwriting.”

Into the basin he dropped the blank sheet. We waited in silence. I, at
least, was not surprised when he held up the wet paper, now covered
with figures scrawled over it.

“Even though there is writing on this sheet,” he observed, holding up
the note, “and figures on the other, I think any one could tell at a
glance that they were not made by the same hand. This was by no means
my first clue.” He was waving the wet paper with the figures. “But it
decided me. Though the message was hidden both by sympathetic ink and
a cryptogram, still, in the light of this new science, the character
of the writer stands out as plain as if it were shouted from the
house-top.”

He paused again. “Graphology tells me,” he proceeded, slowly, “that
the hand that wrote these figures is the hand of one who has all the
characteristics of a spy and a traitor. Before we go further, let me
call to your mind some rather remarkable deductions and discoveries I
have made. By the way, Burke, you left word where we were, in case we
get any news?”

The Secret Service man nodded, but said nothing, as if he did not wish
his voice to break the thread of Kennedy’s disclosure.

“The plot against Maddox Munitions and particularly the wonderful
telautomaton,” continued Kennedy, gravely, “was subtle. Apparently all
was to be accomplished at one coup. The plans were to be stolen on the
_Sybarite_ the same night that the model was to be taken from the safe
in New York. How the latter was accomplished we know well enough, now,
for all practical purposes. Marshall Maddox’s keys were to admit the
thief to the office. The burglar’s microphone did the rest.

“How it was accomplished here I know, too. Without a doubt, the
Japanese, Mito, admitted the plotter to the _Sybarite_, at least
signaled so that it was possible to creep up quietly in a cruiser and
throw a chlorine-gas bomb through a marked port. Marshall Maddox was
overcome――killed. Through the same port-hole his body was thrown.

“Thus at once both the plans and the keys that gave access to the model
were obtained.”

As Craig spoke, my mind hastily reviewed the events of what seemed
now weeks instead of days past. It was as though he had failed in an
explanation of the events in a silent drama.

“Mito was seen ashore that night,” he resumed. “He was suspected. I was
watching him. Worse than that, he knew too much. He was a weak link, an
ever-present danger. Therefore he must be got out of the way. He was
killed. But his mute lips tell quite as eloquent a story as if he were
here before us now. There is another who played an even more important
part. She is not here, but I know you all know whom I mean.”

Kennedy had thus deftly shifted the picture to the little dancer. As he
spoke, Irene Maddox leaned forward, her face burning with indignation
at the mere mention of her hated rival.

“Paquita,” Kennedy continued, carefully choosing his words, “has been
an enigma to me in this case. There is no use mincing matters. There
had long been a feud in the family, before she appeared. I think there
is no need for me here to elaborate how she has brought matters to a
crisis, or the enmity which she stirred up.”

Mrs. Maddox murmured something bitterly under her breath, but Kennedy
quickly changed the subject.

“We know, also, that Paquita met Shelby Maddox,” he hurried on. “In the
minds of some it looked as though she might break Shelby, too. But it
was just because of the reasons that made them think so that precisely
the opposite happened. Strangely enough, the little dancer seems to
have fallen in love with him herself.”

Out of the corner of my eye I was watching Winifred. Her face was set
in deep lines as Kennedy went ahead in his merciless analysis of the
case. Shelby colored, but said nothing, though his manner was of the
man who might have said much, if he had not learned that defense was
worse than silence. Winifred’s face questioned as plainly as words
whether there must always be present that sinister shadow of Paquita.
I wondered whether she was yet convinced that he had never loved the
little dancer.

Kennedy seemed to feel the situation. “But,” he added, slowly and
significantly, “in the mean time something else had happened. Shelby
Maddox had met some one else.”

He had not dwelt on the gossip about Paquita. I could almost feel the
relief of Shelby, for Paquita had been a cause of disagreement even
between Mrs. Walcott and the others.

“Even this new turn of events was used in desperation by the criminal.
In aiming a blow at Shelby, after having been defeated at every other
point, as a last desperate resort an attempt was directed at Winifred
Walcott herself. It was as though some one tried to strike at Shelby
himself, and had decided that the surest way to control him was through
some one whom he loved. Who was it,” he concluded, facing us pointedly,
“that kidnapped Winifred, and why?”

As far as I was able to answer, it might have been anybody. I had even
considered the possibility that Shelby might have carried her off
himself in order to make her turn to him for protection. In fact, I had
never been able to account for the presence of Sanchez with us at the
time. Had I been mistaken in Sanchez?

“Attack after attack on those who were getting closer had failed,”
continued Kennedy. “That being the case, those who might talk must be
silenced. Mito was dead. Still Paquita remained. She, too, must be
silenced. And so my suspicion, in turn, was thrown on her. By this
cipher which I have here she was ordered to go to New York, in order
to mislead me. The plan failed. Always in the most clever schemes of
crime, they fail at some point. Unless I am very much mistaken, Paquita
has seen through the designs. What she will do I do not profess to
know. For, in addition to the mixed motives of her hopeless love for
Shelby Maddox and jealousy of Miss Walcott, her disappearance this
morning indicates that she is in mortal fear of an attack inspired by
the plotter.”

Unavoidably my mind raced ahead to Sanchez, who had followed her so
jealously. Had he really been in love with her――a love as hopeless
as her own for Maddox? Or was he a more sinister figure? Had they
been playing a game, each having an insight into the weakness of this
unhappy family? I recalled the conversation I had had with Henri in the
cabaret and his noncommittal shrug. Perhaps Sanchez and Paquita had
been deeper than we had thought.

“And now,” resumed Kennedy, evidently temporizing in the hope that word
would soon come from the searchers whom we had out, “now we find that a
final effort has been made to remove all incriminating traces of crime.
The car which we could not locate in the garage here has been found
hidden miles away. The fast motor-boat which escaped us last night lies
at the bottom of the bay. At the same time an insidious stock-market
attack has been wrecked, for it was a final purpose in this ambitious
scheme evidently to wreck Maddox Munitions in order to gain control of
it. Even my own resources of science must have failed if it had not
been for the loyalty of one who cast all into the balance at the final
moment.”

We were following Kennedy intently now, and I did not betray that I saw
Shelby’s hand steal out and clasp that of Winifred, which was resting
on a table beside his bed. She did not withdraw her own hand.

The telephone rang and Burke, who was nearest it, answered.

The conversation was brief. Evidently the party at the other end was
doing most of the talking, but as we scanned the detective’s face we
could see that something important had happened.

“You do not know where Sanchez has gone?” asked Burke, finally, adding,
“Keep the boys on the trail then, until you get some clue. Good-by.”

He hung up the receiver slowly and turned toward Kennedy, but I do not
think any of us were prepared for his message.

“Paquita has committed suicide!” he blurted out, suddenly.

We looked at one another in amazement at this startling turn of events.

What did it mean? Had she seen nothing more to live for, or had some
one pursued her and was she anticipating fate?

“It was Riley,” recounted Burke, briefly. “Evidently she had taken
poison. They found her body in the woods not far from where we
discovered the car and the sunken boat. Some children say they saw a
man there――he answers the description of Sanchez. Riley is following
the clue.”

“What drove her to it? Was there no word, no note?” asked Irene Maddox,
awed by the tragedy.

“Yes,” replied Burke. “On a piece of paper she had written, ‘I have
mailed a letter to Shelby Maddox. May God forgive me for what I have
done. There is nothing left in life for me.’ That is all.”

We gazed at one another in consternation.

“Poor girl!” repeated Kennedy in a low tone. “She was merely a pawn
in the hands of another. But it is a dangerous game――this game of
hearts――even with the heart of an adventuress.”

“I think we should organize a search for this fellow Sanchez before he
can get away,” proposed Johnson Walcott, taking a step toward Kennedy.
“My own car is below. We can get up a posse in no time right at the
Lodge.”

Before any one could take up the suggestion the door of the room flew
open.

There stood Sanchez himself――pale, his eyes staring, his whole manner
that of one who had reached the last point of desperation.

Half-way across the room he stopped, faced us, and tossed down on a
table before Kennedy a package wrapped in oiled silk.

“That is my revenge!” he exclaimed in a voice almost sepulchral. “I
found it in the boat before I scuttled it.”

Craig tore it open. There, unrolled before us, at last lay the plans of
the deadly telautomaton.

Of a sudden I realized that the model had destroyed itself in sinking
the _Sybarite_. With the plans in our possession the secret was safe.

Slowly Sanchez raised an accusing finger, but before he could utter a
word Craig had backed against the door and stood holding it.

“Some one has been keeping under cover here,” Craig shot out suddenly,
“hiding behind others who were his tools――first Mito, then Paquita, who
has been driven to her death, now Sanchez.

“Graphology first betrayed his fine hand of crime to me. The
stock-market attack confirmed my suspicion. Sanchez has completed――
Don’t shoot! Burke has you covered already. Walter――will you be so kind
as to disarm Johnson Walcott?”


                               THE END




Transcriber’s Note:

Words may have multiple spelling variations or inconsistent hyphenation
in the text. These have been left unchanged. Obsolete and alternative
spellings were retained. Misspelled words were corrected.

Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Obvious printing errors, such as backwards, upside down, or
partially printed letters and punctuation, were corrected. Final stops
missing at the end of sentences and abbreviations were added. Duplicate
letters at line endings or page breaks were removed.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURESS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.