THE
  ALDINE SPELLER

  PART TWO

  FOR GRADES THREE AND FOUR


  BY

  CATHERINE T. BRYCE

  ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
  MINNEAPOLIS, MINN.

  AND

  FRANK J. SHERMAN

  FORMERLY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
  MONSON, MASS.


  [Illustration]


  NEW YORK
  NEWSON & COMPANY




  COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY
  NEWSON & COMPANY.

  _All rights reserved._




PREFACE


To teachers and the public alike, probably no subject taught in
the public schools has been more disappointing than spelling. This
disappointment is undoubtedly due to:

1. Defective material for study and poor methods of teaching;

2. Too much testing and too little teaching;

3. Finding errors rather than preventing them;

4. The use of a theoretical, rather than the practical, vocabulary of
children and adults.

The teaching of spelling must be done from a spelling book in the hands
of the children, since the individual teacher does not have the time to
prepare lists of words which will produce as good results as the lists
given in a spelling book, the selection and preparation of which are
the result of years of special observation and testing.

A plan of teaching spelling to secure the best results should consist
of a thoughtful, systematic, and comprehensive presentation of the
words and spelling facts which every pupil must learn. It must contain
an adequate and simple system of phonics for the primary grades, since
a large percentage of the words in common use are purely phonetic and
present no spelling difficulties once a sane and practical phonetic
foundation is fixed. It must have a vocabulary selected and graded with
such care that it will give the child the ability to spell correctly
those words which he needs to use in his written work, and that it will
also develop and broaden his vocabulary for his future needs. It should
contain suitable directions and hints to the teacher, sufficiently
removed from the pupil’s text so that he may not be confused by them.
It may, and in many grades should, contain information and suggestions
to the pupil that will help him to master the many peculiarly
non-phonetic words which present their individual problems and must
be individually mastered. It should contain a very few of the most
important spelling rules simply stated. It should contain a large
variety of sentences for dictation, which may wisely take the form of
gems of thought. Such a plan, well taught, constantly supplemented by
the teacher with such words as the peculiar difficulties of individual
pupils and classes may require, will produce a maximum of ability to
spell correctly.

In the Aldine Speller the authors have presented a plan of teaching
which in actual results has proved singularly effective. The vocabulary
has been selected and graded with unusual care to meet the actual needs
of life and to develop a spelling sense. In its preparation a careful
comparison was made of the vocabularies of several of the most popular
spelling books of the day in respect to both gradation and selection.
Paralleling this, the various recent tests and investigations, notably
those of Ayres, Jones, and Cook and O’Shea, have been checked.
The resulting vocabulary is thought to represent the real writing
vocabulary of the average child of the grade in which it is taught.
Special and repeated drills are given on the real trouble makers--the
one hundred and more words that comprise four-fifths of the misspelled
words of the schoolroom.

In the primary grades use is made of exceptionally valuable phonetic
lists. Emphasis is placed upon this important and very practical
foundation for the development of a spelling sense, and its mastery in
the primary grades will do much to train children to spell correctly.
A few comparatively uncommon words are used in these lists chiefly for
the value of the phonetic drill.

As every error creates a tendency, and if repeated quickly establishes
a habit, it is important that the correct spelling of words be taught
before children have occasion to write them. Every worth-while test
and investigation shows the most common and most useful words in
our language to be the words used early by children. It is likewise
certain that very many of the misspelled words are one-syllable words
in very common use. It would, therefore, seem essential that the
real teaching of spelling should be done as early as possible in
the grades--somewhat earlier than has frequently been the case--that
correct habits, rather than incorrect ones, may be formed.

Obligation is expressed to Dr. Leonard P. Ayres of the Russell Sage
Foundation for kind permission to make use of his list of “The Thousand
Commonest Words.” These and some four thousand other very common and
important words constitute the Aldine vocabulary.

That the Aldine Speller may lead to some real teaching, and decrease
“lesson hearing,” is the hope of the authors.




DIRECTIONS TO TEACHERS


ORAL SPELLING

Oral spelling should always precede written spelling in the primary
grades. Careful and distinct pronunciation by the child should always
precede oral spelling. Children cannot be expected to spell correctly
words that they cannot pronounce. It is well to emphasize the form of a
word of more than one syllable by syllabication. It makes the spelling
more obvious, promotes clear enunciation, and assists in creating a
correct mental picture of the word. The sight words in this book are so
syllabicated when first presented. A slight pause between the syllables
is usually sufficient in oral spelling. In writing the words they
should not be divided.


TESTING

The mere “hearing” of spelling lessons is happily a thing of the past
in most schools. However, teachers cannot be too strongly impressed
with the worthlessness of such exercises. The primary object is to
instruct, not to examine--to teach to spell correctly, not to find out
how many words may be spelled incorrectly. Review lessons should be
given frequently, and these are sufficient for test purposes. All other
lessons should be thoroughly taught with instruction the aim and object
of the lesson.


INTEREST

It has been well said that “interest is nine-tenths of education.” This
is true in teaching spelling. Any means which will arouse interest in
mastering words is likely to be effective. So far as our forefathers
succeeded in securing results in this subject they did so by interest
in the old-fashioned “spelling-bee.” Spelling matches of various sorts
are desirable for creating interest. The review lists and special lists
will be found admirable for this purpose. It should be remembered,
however, that this is testing what is already learned and is not
teaching something new.


PUPILS’ LISTS

Each pupil has his own difficulties in spelling. Teach him to make
private lists of the words which he finds especially hard to spell and
have him use extra effort to conquer these trouble-makers. These may
be listed in the back of his textbook or in his individual note book.
Occasional lessons may be devoted entirely to this kind of exercise and
they should be individual and painstaking. Such words should be watched
for in the other written work and misspelling prevented rather than
corrected. Besides making the misspelled words the basis of a lesson
they may well be correctly and carefully written on the board with the
difficulty shown in colored crayon. If possible leave them in sight for
several days.


HOMOPHONES

Words spelled differently but pronounced alike should be kept apart
until the spelling of each has become fixed and the ability to use
correctly in sentences reasonably sure. Then only may they safely be
brought together for comparison. When this is done much care must be
used that no confusion may exist in the child’s mind as to the proper
use of each.


ORDER OF PRESENTATION

All children do not learn spelling equally well in the same way. Some
are sense organ learners while others are largely motor organ learners.
Most children are both. In all cases the order of seeing words, hearing
them pronounced, pronouncing them, spelling them aloud, and then
writing them, will be found to be most effective. Appeal is thus made
successively to the eye, the ear, the memory, and the hand.


ENUNCIATION

Poor enunciation is a common source of incorrect spelling. Occasionally
test your pupils on sounding words. See to it that they learn to give
the right value to the vowel sounds and do not omit any that should be
sounded. Do not permit “in” for “ing,” final “ed” to be sounded like
“t,” or “body” to be sounded “buddy.” Remember that “A word correctly
pronounced is half spelled.”


PROPER NAMES

No place has been given in this book to proper names since the needs of
different classrooms vary so widely. They must be thoroughly taught,
however, and it is the teacher’s duty to teach such proper names as her
pupils need to use. Strongly emphasize the fact that these proper names
always begin with a capital letter.


PHONETIC WORDS

Many of the words in this book are grouped into phonetic lists. The
object of this is strongly to impress the common part of these words
upon the child. The repeated sight, sound, and spelling of this common
combination of letters make it possible to learn the words in a list
easily and in a short time. This common part is _pronounced_ the same
and _spelled_ the same in all the words of a list. Have the children
_find_ this common part, _pronounce_ it distinctly, and _spell_ it.
Then have each word in the list spelled orally, emphasizing the part
that is not common. For example, in lesson 6, page 2, is a list of
phonetic words.

1. Have the children give the part that is common to every word in the
list--_ever_.

2. Have the children point to and pronounce this common part.

3. Have this common part spelled orally.

4. Have the children pronounce each word in the list, slightly
separating and emphasizing the part that is different, as _n_--e-v-e-r,
_c-l_--e-v-e-r.

5. Have each word spelled orally, emphasizing the uncommon part.

By giving or having the children give sentences using the words
correctly, make sure that the meaning of every word is understood by
the pupils.

Much of the spelling of phonetic lists may be done orally. After
several groups have been studied, dictate words from them to be written
by the children. For example, after lessons 5, 6, and 7 have been
studied and spelled orally, dictate ten or twelve words selected from
these groups for the children to write. Several groups may be studied
and spelled orally in one spelling period, and words from these groups
dictated and written during another period. The writing of a spelling
lesson only tests the pupil’s power. Put most of your time and effort
into teaching, into helping the pupils to acquire the power.


WORDS THAT ARE NOT PHONETIC

Most so called non-phonetic words contain some particular letter, or
combination of letters, that makes the spelling difficult. If this
difficulty is clearly pointed out, it is half overcome. Find, with the
pupils, the “catch” in each word; emphasize it by underlining, or by
writing it in colored chalk, or by focusing the children’s attention on
it in some way. Then have them concentrate their energy in mastering it.

Read with the children the story addressed to them at the beginning
of their book, “The King’s Rules.” Refer to the story frequently and
encourage them to follow the rules daily. Study the notes on the
spelling of difficult words throughout the book. See that the children
not only apply the notes on the pages on which they occur, but look for
other words that contain the same problems.

For seat work, after every word in a lesson has been correctly and
distinctly pronounced, have the children decide what in each word
calls for special attention. This they may do by copying the word and
indicating in some way the difficulty as by underlining. Or they may
make little notes based on those in their book.

Make your children keen to detect and overcome these special
difficulties, and their interest will secure excellent results.


REVIEW WORDS

From time to time pages of review words are given. These lists are
made up of commonly used, often misspelled, words. Call the children’s
attention over and over again to the difficulties in these words. Use
some of them daily. Hold the children to the correct spelling of them
in all written work. Make opportunities to use them. Keep a record in
plain sight, showing the children’s progress in the mastery of these
words. Make the mastery of these words a personal matter to yourself,
even to the extent of considering your teaching a failure if every
child in the third year does not form the habit of spelling correctly
the words on page 30, and every child in the fourth year those on page
75. Call attention to these pages at the beginning of the year, and
arouse the children’s interest and ambition to master the words as
early as possible.


QUOTATIONS

The sentences, proverbs, poems, myths, and various quotations are
carefully selected for certain definite purposes:

1. They review the words that have been taught.

2. They give new words in their natural context--a much better way of
fixing their meaning and making them a part of the child’s vocabulary
than the use of definitions or short, unrelated sentences.

3. They are examples of good English and may serve as models for the
children’s attempts at composition.

These quotations may be used in different ways:

1. _Copying._ Read the selection with the children that they may have
an idea of the whole. Do not allow them to copy letter by letter,
glancing from the book to the paper. At first they may study and copy
single words, later they should read and copy phrases, clauses, and
sentences.

The child’s copy should always be compared with the book and corrected.
A special mark or word of praise should be given to the child who makes
an exact copy.

2. _Dictation._ In dictating, read a complete sentence once for the
children. Do not use the poems for dictation, as dictating them line by
line often destroys the sense, and always the beauty, of the rhythm.

3. _Memory._ Children often spell words correctly when they are
dictated and misspell the same words when they are trying to express
their own thought. For this reason it is well to have the children
write some of the selections from memory. It is a step between taking
dictation and writing original compositions. The proverbs and rhymes
are especially well adapted for memory work.


REPRODUCTION

The short stories may be rewritten, using different words in place of
certain indicated words, as suggested in lesson 99, page 64, or a free
reproduction may be made.


ORIGINAL SENTENCES

The words in each lesson have been grouped about a central thought.
Have the children write original sentences or stories, using the words
in a lesson, as in lesson 31, page 51.


AUTHORS

The authors of the different selections, or their sources, are given in
the child’s book. It is hoped he will thus become somewhat acquainted
with their origin. But he should not be required or expected to
memorize these names or sources.


PICTURES

For seat work have the children make lists of words suggested by the
pictures in their book.


THE VOCABULARY

The vocabulary, alphabetically arranged, will be found on pages 33 and
74. Encourage the children to use this vocabulary to check up the words
that they are positive they can spell correctly, and for reference to
find any word they may wish to use in their written work. These lists
of words may also be used for oral spelling matches or written reviews.
Regularly and systematically test the pupils. Keep records, to which
the children have ready access, showing their progress and efficiency.
Have each child keep a list of the words he misspells, and keep on
urging him and testing him, until he has mastered his particular “word
demons.”


SUMMARY

To sum up: Arouse a spelling interest; develop a spelling sense; teach
the children how to study intelligently; review constantly; keep
definite records of progress.




  TO THE GIRLS AND BOYS:


 THE KING’S RULES

 (Said to be a true story)

 Late one summer afternoon a boy sat at his desk trying to learn a
 spelling lesson. It was warm in the schoolroom and the boy’s head
 ached. His teacher had gone out for a moment and he was alone.

 A shadow fell across his desk. The boy looked up and saw a stranger
 standing before him. He thought he had seen this man before. He felt
 that he was a great man.

 “Why are you not out of doors playing with the other children?” asked
 the stranger.

 “I am studying my spelling lesson,” answered the boy. “I have to stay
 in every night because I just can’t learn how to spell. I hate it!”

 “Nonsense!” said the man. “I can tell you in one minute how to learn
 to spell.”

 The boy laughed. “You must be a magician,” he said.

 “No,” said the man, “I am not a magician, but I am the king. Boy, do
 you think your king would tell you anything that is not true?”

 “No, Sire,” answered the boy, springing to his feet, for now he
 recognized the king from pictures he had seen.

 “Then listen, my lad. Any one can become a good speller who follows
 these three rules:

 “1. _Listen_ carefully when the word is spoken.

 “2. _Say_ it correctly when you speak it.

 “3. _Look_ at the word thoughtfully to get an exact picture of it in
 your mind.

 “If you will study every word in your lesson in this way, you will
 never again have to stay after school to learn your spelling lesson.”

 “Thank you, Sire,” said the boy. “I will follow your three rules.”

 Twenty-two years later the king received a present of a wonderful
 book. When he opened it, he found the following words written on the
 first page:

  “This book is gratefully dedicated to
  The King
  By the boy whom he taught to spell.”

 Yes, the boy followed the king’s rules. He learned how to spell and
 how to write, and now he was one of the greatest writers in the land.

Do _you listen_ carefully while your teacher pronounces each word, or
do you write what you _think_ she says?

Do _you say_ each word correctly, or do you say _jest_ when you mean
_just_, or _comin’_ when you mean _coming_?

Do _you look_ carefully at each word until you have an exact picture of
it in your mind?

Will you try to follow the king’s rules in the study of the spelling
words in this book?

They will surely make your work better and easier.




  THE ALDINE SPELLER

  PART II

  THIRD YEAR

[Illustration]


         1                           2

  world     hap py           should      cure
  full      I am              would      sure
  num ber   I’m               could      pure

When you spell _world_ make the _o_ very clear.

Be _sure_ you do not put an _h_ in _sure_.


3

HAPPY THOUGHT

    The world is so full of a number of things,
    I’m sure we should all be as happy as kings.

                                        --ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

     4          5            6            7

  shoes      bat tle        ev er       leave
  horse      cat tle       nev er       weave
  rid er     rat tle      clev er      cleave
  dai ly     tat tle       sev er       heave
  its       coun try         post       shall

_Shoes_ is a word to look at thoughtfully.


8

  For want of a nail the shoe was lost.
  For want of a shoe the horse was lost.
  For want of a horse the rider was lost.
  For want of a rider the battle was lost.
  For want of a battle the country was lost.


                      9

   reach      teach      peach      trust
  preach      beach       each      enter


   10          11          12          13

  drank       life        this        fox
  thank       wife        hiss         ox
   bank      knife        kiss         ox en
   rank     strife       bliss         roof
  plank      stone        miss         proof
   sank    fol low        wire         case

Which is the hardest word in Lesson 11? Why?


14

  be come      read         oar      pitch er
  dropped      wa ter      roar      thirst y


15

THE CROW AND THE PITCHER

    Did you ever read about the thirsty crow?
    One day he found a pitcher with some water in it.
    He could not reach the water.
    He dropped stones into the pitcher.
    The water rose to the top.
    Then the crow drank his fill.

                                        --ÆSOP.


   16         17         18        19

   feel     great        felt     next
   heel     a fraid      melt     size
   peel     li on        belt     morn ing
  kneel     off         knelt     safe
  wheel     chase       spelt     heard


20

THE FOX AND THE LION

    Once a fox heard a lion roar.
    He was afraid and ran off.
    But the lion did not chase him.


21

    Next morning the fox again met the lion.
    He looked at its great size and was not afraid.
    The lion roared, but the fox did not run.
    This time he felt safe.

                                        --ÆSOP.


   22         23         24         25

  bowl      scrape     first        dash
  floor      clean     sec ond      lash
  side        lean     third       flash
  be side     bean     fourth       rash
  a round     mean     fifth        sash
  bot tom     like     moth er      cash

[Illustration]


26

  scratch    catch    match
    patch    latch    hatch


27

    Jack likes to scrape the cake bowl.
    Mother sets it on the floor.
    Jack sits down beside it.
    First he scratches around the side.
    Then he scrapes the bottom clean.


    28         29         30         31

  float     In di an      boy       pond
   boat     flow er       joy       fond
   coat     heart         toy       bond
   goat     lil y         coy      blond
    oats    gold en      Troy      which

Why do _Indian_ and _Troy_ begin with capitals?

Don’t forget the _e_ in _heart_.

Be very careful in spelling _which_.


32

THE FIRST WATERLILY

[Illustration]

    One night an Indian boy saw a star fall.
    Next morning he found a new flower.
    It had a golden star in its heart.
    It floated on a still pond.
    This was our first waterlily.

                                        --INDIAN MYTH.


    33         34          35         36

     own      trace        cut     goose
   known      place        but     geese
   shown       race        hut     strange
   grown      grace        nut     sor ry
  thrown       face        rut     ev er y
   blown       lace       shut     ev er y bod y
    sown      space     oth er     ev er y thing
    laid    thought    in side     an oth er


37

THE GOLDEN EGGS

    A man once owned a strange goose.
    Every day she laid a golden egg.
    The man thought she must be full of gold.
    He killed the goose and cut her open.
    But not a trace of gold could he find.
    She was just like other geese.
    Then how sorry the man felt!


                                        --ÆSOP.

[Illustration]


     38         39          40         41

  pic ture    bough        ap ple     au tumn
  bar rel     branch       bas ket    leaf
  lad der     limb         han dle    sour
  climb       slip pers    bus y      sug ar
  gath er     toe          curls      ripe

What letters are not sounded in _climb_, _limb_, _autumn_?

Be sure you say _basket_ correctly.


42

GATHERING APPLES

  It is autumn.
  The apples are ripe.
  The children are busy gathering them.
  These are not sour apples.
  They are as sweet as sugar.


      43         44         45         46

    roll        root      mo ment     week
    toll        boot      min ute     peek
  stroll        hoot      hour        seek
   knoll        soot      month      cheek
   south      dai ly      north       meek


47

  to day     to night     to mor row     yes ter day
            af ter noon           eve ning


    48         49         50         51

  steal      al most    bet ter     age
   meal      beau ty    let ter    rage
   deal      than       beg        cage
   heal      work       leg        page
   seal      ei ther    keg       stage
   thus     nei ther    peg        wage

There is only one _l_ in _almost_.

Look at _ei_ in _either_ and _neither_.


52

  Almost never wins.

                                        --GERMAN.

  A thing of beauty is a joy forever.

                                        --JOHN KEATS.

  Better beg than steal,
  But better work than either.

                                        --RUSSIAN.

  He buys very dear who begs.

                                        --PORTUGUESE.

The following review words are often misspelled. Each has a little
“catch” in it. Are you going to be caught by these little words? Use
the king’s third rule. _See_ what is hard in each word, then you can
soon learn how to spell them all.


         53                   54        55

  there     over there       any       been
  their     their books     many       some
  don’t     do not         which       once
  can’t     can not        could       does
  won’t     will not       would       sure
  hear      I hear        should       where
  here      Come here       hour       just

People who misspell _which_ and _where_ do not say the _h_ in these
words. Do you?

People who misspell _just_ do not see the letters of the little word
_us_ in the middle. They do not say the word right. Do you?

Which words have silent letters?


56

  but ter         pret ty         sun ny
  but ter cups    com ing         oh

[Illustration]


57

      Buttercups and daisies,
    Oh the pretty flowers!
      Coming in the springtime,
    Tell of sunny hours.

                                        --MARY HOWITT.

When _ing_ is added to _come_ to make _coming_, the _e_ is dropped.

Look at _e_ in _pretty_.


    58         59         60         61

    aid       pea        faint       wear
   maid       sea        paint       bear
   paid       lea        saint       tear
   laid       tea        dain ty     pear
  sto ry      fix       out side    these


     62         63          64        65

   harm       fel low       ink      bunch
    arm       yel low     think      lunch
  charm       feath er     sink      does not
   farm       weath er     pink      doesn’t
   farm er    leath er     wink      help
   your       move        drink      point

Be sure to pronounce the _you_ in _your_.


66

    When about to put your words in ink,
    It will do no harm to stop and think.

  A grain does not fill a sack but it helps its fellows.

                                        --SPANISH.

  A feather will point the wind.

                                        --DANISH.


67

  cart        tart        dart        art
  part       start       chart      smart


      68         69         70           71

  po ta toes    God       noth ing       talk
  lamb          food      an y thing     walk
  mouth         mon ey    some thing    chalk
  wolf          gives     some time     bun ny
  heav y        giv en    some bod y    fun ny
  ov er         soft      a like        gave


72

  Doing nothing is doing ill.

                                        --SCOTTISH.

  Lambs don’t run into the mouth of the sleeping wolf.

                                        --DANISH.

  God gives every bird its food,
      but does not throw it into
      the nest.

                                        --J. G. HOLLAND.

[Illustration]


73

  la zy       sheep       wool       harm

  Potatoes don’t grow by the side of the pot.

                                        --DUTCH.

  A lazy sheep thinks its wool heavy.

                                        --SCOTTISH.

  Want of care does more harm than want of money.

                                        --BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.


74

  through        a mong        Bil ly        that is
  mead ow        pa per        know          that’s

Look carefully at _ough_ in _through_, _ea_ in _meadow_, and _o_ in
_among_.


75

      This I know, I love to play,
    Through the meadow, among the hay,
      Up the water and over the lea,
    That’s the way for Billy and me.

                                        --JAMES HOGG.


76

  care ful        riv er       worth        house
  care less       up set       what ev er   mouse

Look carefully at the _o_ in _worth_.


77

  Be careful in all things.

  A little stone may upset a large cart.

                                        --ITALIAN.

  A mouse can drink no more than its fill from a river.

                                        --CHINESE.

  Whatever is worth doing at all is worth doing well.

                                        --CHESTERFIELD.



78

  he ro         fruit         climb         hon ey
  eas y          have            or         mon ey

Look carefully at the _i_ in _fruit_, the _o_ in _honey_ and _money_,
and the _b_ in _climb_.

_Easy_ is a word often misspelled.

Remember the King’s third rule.


79

  Who does the best he can is a hero.

                                        --JOSH BILLINGS.

  He who would have the fruit must climb the tree.

                                        --SPANISH.

    No bees, no honey;
    No work, no money.

  It is as easy to grin as to growl.

                                        --FRENCH.

[Illustration]


     80         81               82

   task       laugh         care       hare
   cask       laugh ing     dare       fare
  flask       doc tor       bare       pare
   mask       world        scare      stare
   ask        smile         rare      snare
   asked       mile        spare      glare
   ask ing    while        share     square


83

    Laugh at your ills,
      And save doctor’s bills.

                                        --SPANISH.

  Smile on the world and it will smile on you.

                                        --ITALIAN.

  A light heart, a light task.

                                        --FRENCH.


84

  work    friend    none    hap py
  true                      hap pi ness

Look carefully at the _o_ in _work_ and in _none_, the _i_ in _friend_
and in _happiness_.


85

  Be true to your word, your work, and your friend.

                                        --JOHN BOYLE O’REILLY.

  Love all, do wrong to none.

                                        --SHAKESPEARE.

    All who joy would win
    Must share it--Happiness was born a twin.

                                        --BYRON.


     86          87         88          89

  al ways        east     spo ken     blue
  be have       least     bro ken      due
  whole         feast       a ble      cue
  man ner ly    beast      ta ble     glue
  du ty         yeast      fa ble      hue

There is only one _l_ in _always_.


90

    A child should always say what’s true,
    And speak when he is spoken to,
    And behave mannerly at table;
    At least as far as he is able.

                                        --STEVENSON.

[Illustration]


    91        92       93         94

  much       hard    haste        hole
  re main    card    has ten     whole
  of ten     yard    taste       stole
  tar dy    guard    paste        pole
  ar rive    lard    waste        sole
  learn      hurt    it self     print

The letter _t_ is not sounded in _often_, but don’t leave it out when
you spell the word.

Look at _u_ in _guard_.

Remember the _w_ in _whole_.


95

  Haste not, rest not.

                                        --GOETHE.

  Too swift arrives as tardy as too late.

                                        --SHAKESPEARE.

  Who hastens too much often remains behind.

                                        --GERMAN.

  Learn to creep before you run.

                                        --SCOTTISH.


     96           97             98         99

  e lev en     six teen       thir ty     cream
  twelve       sev en teen    for ty       team
  thir teen    eight een      fif ty       beam
  four teen    nine teen      six ty      dream
  fit teen     twen ty        hun dred    steam


        100                    101

  Sun day     Sun.       Wednes day    Wed.
  Mon day     Mon.       Thurs day     Thurs.
  Tues day    Tues.      Sat ur day    Sat.
  Fri day     Fri.       Jan u a ry    Jan.

Look at the _d_ and the second _e_ in _Wednesday_ and the _u_ in
_Saturday_.


       102                 103

  speak     leak       cane      pane
   weak     peak       lane      vane
   beak    freak       mane     crane


         104                    105

  child      lov ing      end      tend
   mild      giv ing     send     spend
   wild      liv ing     lend      bend
   woe    hap pi est     mend

When _ing_ is added to _love_, _give_, and _life_, _e_ is dropped. What
letter is changed in _life_?

[Illustration]


106

BIRTHDAYS

              Monday’s child is fair of face,
              Tuesday’s child is full of grace,
              Wednesday’s child is full of woe,
            Thursday’s child has far to go,
          Friday’s child is loving and giving,
        Saturday’s child must work for a living;
      But the happiest child of all, they say,
    Is the child who is born on the week’s first day.


   107           108

  dish         pie
  fin ger      please
  thumb        such
  stock ing    piece
  bus y        sleeve

[Illustration]


109

    Such a busy girl!
    She is peeling apples for a pie.
    Please give me a piece of pie.


    110      111         112        113

  dress     wrist      skirt        neck
  guess      mist      shirt        deck
  bless     twist       dirt        peck
   less      fist       flirt      check
  press     young       suf fer    speck


     114                      115

  Jan u a ry    Jan.      Sep tem ber    Sept.
  Feb ru a ry   Feb.      Oc to ber      Oct.
  A pril        Apr.      No vem ber     Nov.
  Au gust       Aug.      De cem ber     Dec.

[Illustration]


116

  dance     do not      world is
  mu sic    don’t       world’s
  sulk


117

THE WORLD’S MUSIC

    The world’s a very happy place,
    Where every child should dance and sing,
    And always have a smiling face,
    And never sulk at anything.

                                        --GABRIEL SETOUN.


   118        119         120       121

   store     re turn      dog     change
    wore     count        log     says
    more     car ried    frog     mis take
   shore     for get      hog     dol lars
  or der     sign        form     pen ny


122

JACK’S ORDER BOOK

  Every day Jack goes to the store for mother.
  He writes her orders in a book.
  He says it is a real order book.
  He never forgets anything.


123

  When he returns he counts his change.
  He never makes a mistake.
  He has carried many dollars and never lost a cent.
  Every day mother signs the order book.

       124              125           126

  doz en      doz.     cheese       or ange
  pound       lb.      fresh        ber ry
  pounds      lbs.     loaf         ber ries
  gal lon     gal.     loaves       oat meal
  quart       qt.      flour        soap
  pint        pt.      oil          add


TWO PAGES FROM JACK’S ORDER BOOK

      127                      128

  Mon., June 7           Fri., June 11

  1 lb. cheese.          1 bag flour
  1 doz. fresh eggs      3 gal. oil
  1 loaf bread           1 doz. oranges
  1 qt. berries          1 box oatmeal
  1 pt. cream            6 cakes soap
  5 lbs. sugar           3 loaves bread
  1 lb. tea              1 lb. candy


129

  sea sons           fire
            sum mer

[Illustration]

    Sing a song of seasons,
    Something bright in all,--
    Flowers in the summer,
    Fires in the fall.

                                        --STEVENSON.


130

   lip      nip     grip      chip
  drip      tip     whip       hip
   dip     slip     skip      ship


131

  raise     dust      turn    churn
  road      dust y    burn    e ven


132

THE FLY ON THE CART WHEEL

    Once there was a fly on a cart wheel.

    The wheel turned round and the dust from the road rose
    in clouds.

    “Oh,” cried the fly, “what a dust we raise!”

    But the wheel did not even know that the fly was there.

                                        --ÆSOP.


    133      134      135       136

  hun ter    dug      dull     mat ter
  teeth      bug      hull    plat ter
  tooth      rug     skull    scat ter
  him self   tug     since    flat ter
  whom       jug    hasn’t    chat ter


137

THE HUNTER AND THE LION

 “Have you seen any tracks of a lion?” asked a hunter of a man whom he
 met.

 “Oh, I can show you the lion himself,” said the man.

 The hunter turned pale with fright. His teeth chattered.

 “I don’t want to see the lion. I only want to see his tracks,” he
 cried.

                                        --ÆSOP.


   138     139       140        141

    oak    pale      rush     dip per
  cloak    tale     brush    slip per
  croak    gale     crush    skip per
   soak    sale      hush    drip ping
   move    scale     mush    whip ping
  tenth    whale    blush     tip ping


REVIEW OF TROUBLESOME WORDS


     142        143        144       145

  friend      Tuesday    making     just
  always      won’t      having     doctor
  done        too        coming     know
  heard       two        loving     minute
  Wednesday   among      writing    blue
  February    busy       buy        through
  very        none       week       every


   146       147       148       149

  whole     shoes     piece     often
  there     any       been      sugar
  their     many      once      hour
  don’t     which     does      says
  here      could     sure      laid
  can’t     should    where     break
  world     would     climb     flour


The following 100 words have been found to be the “One Hundred
Commonest Words in the English Language.” They are used and repeated so
frequently in our writing that they constitute about one half of all
the words we write. You have studied all of them. Can you spell each of
them correctly?

  the     will     my        had
  and     as       this      has
  of      have     his       very
  to      not      which     were
  I       with     dear      been
  a       be       from      would
  in      your     are       she
  that    at       all       or
  you     we       me        there
  for     on       so        her
  it      he       one       an
  was     by       if        when
  is      but      they      time
  go      please   letter    do
  some    week     make      after
  any     night    write     than
  can     their    thing     sir
  what    other    think     last
  send    up       should    house
  out     our      truly     just
  them    good     now       over
  him     say      its       then
  more    could    two       work
  about   who      take      day
  no      may      thank     here


THIRD YEAR VOCABULARY

[Illustration]

We have followed the king’s rules. We can spell all these words. Can
you?

  able      another    asking     beam
  add       anything   August     bean
  afraid    apple      autumn     bear
  afternoon April      bank       beast
  age       arm        bare       beauty
  aid       around     barrel     became
  alike     arrive     basket     been
  almost    art        battle     beg
  always    ask        beach      behave
  among     asked      beak       belt
  bend      branch     cart       clever
  berries   broken     case       climb
  berry     brush      cash       cloak
  beside    bug        cask       coat
  better    bunch      catch      coming
  Billy     bunny      cattle     could
  bless     burn       chalk      count
  bliss     busy       change     country
  blond     but        charm      crane
  blown     butter     chart      crank
  blue      buttercups chase      cream
  blush     cage       chatter    croak
  boat      cane       check      crush
  bond      can’t      cheek      cue
  boot      card       cheese     cure
  bottom    care       child      curls
  bough     careful    chip       cut
  bowl      careless   churn      daily
  boy       carried    clean      dainty
  dance     dream      enter      fifteen
  dare      dress      even       fifth
  dart      drink      evening    fifty
  dash      drip       ever       finger
  deal      dripping   every      fire
  December  dropped    everybody  first
  deck      due        everything fist
  dip       dug        fable      fix
  dipper    dull       face       flash
  dirt      dust       faint      flask
  dish      dusty      fare       flatter
  doctor    duty       farm       flirt
  does      each       farmer     float
  doesn’t   east       feast      floor
  dog       easy       feather    flour
  dollar    eighteen   February   flower
  don’t     either     feel       follow
  dozen     eleven     fellow     fond
  drank     end        felt       food
  form      given      hare       hiss
  forget    giving     harm       hog
  forty     glare      hasn’t     hole
  fourteen  glue       haste      honey
  fourth    goat       hasten     hoot
  fox       God        hatch      horse
  freak     golden     have       hour
  fresh     goose      heal       house
  Friday    grace      hear       hue
  friend    great      heard      hull
  frog      grip       heart      hundred
  fruit     grown      heave      hunter
  funny     guard      heavy      hurt
  gale      guess      heel       hush
  gallon    handle     help       hut
  gather    happiest   here       I’m
  gave      happiness  hero       Indian
  geese     happy      himself    ink
  give      hard       hip        inside
  its       lard       limb       meek
  itself    lash       lion       melt
  January   latch      lip        mend
  joy       laugh      living     mild
  jug       laughing   loaf       mile
  just      leaf       loaves     minute
  keg       leak       log        miss
  kiss      lean       loving     mist
  kneel     learn      lunch      mistake
  knelt     least      maid       moment
  knife     leather    mane       Monday
  knoll     leave      mannerly   money
  know      leg        many       month
  known     lend       mask       more
  lace      less       match      morning
  ladder    letter     matter     mother
  laid      life       meadow     mouse
  lamb      lily       meal       mouth
  lane      like       mean       move
  much      off        paper      pitcher
  music     often      pare       place
  neck      oh         part       platter
  neither   oil        paste      please
  never     once       patch      point
  next      or         pea        pole
  nineteen  orange     peach      pond
  nip       order      pear       post
  none      other      peak       potatoes
  north     outside    peck       pound
  nothing   over       peek       preach
  November  own        peel       press
  number    ox         peg        pretty
  nut       oxen       penny      print
  oak       page       picture    proof
  oar       paid       pie        punch
  oatmeal   paint      piece      pure
  oats      pale       pink       quart
  October   pane       pint       race
  rage      rush       September  size
  raise     rut        seventeen  skip
  rank      safe       seventy    skipper
  rare      saint      sever      skirt
  rash      sale       shall      skull
  rattle    sash       share      sleeve
  reach     Saturday   ship       slip
  read      says       shirt      slippers
  remain    scale      shoes      smart
  return    scare      shore      smile
  rider     scatter    should     snare
  ripe      scrape     shown      soak
  river     scratch    shut       soap
  road      sea        side       soft
  roar      seal       sign       sole
  roll      seasons    since      some
  roof      second     sink       somebody
  root      seek       sixteen    something
  rug       send       sixty      sometime
  sorry     stone      task       thirty
  sour      store      taste      this
  south     story      tea        through
  sown      strange    teach      thrown
  space     strife     team       thumb
  spare     stroll     tear       Thursday
  speak     such       teeth      thus
  speck     suffer     tend       tip
  spelt     sugar      tenth      tipping
  spend     sulk       than       today
  spoken    summer     thank      toe
  square    Sunday     that’s     toll
  stage     sunny      their      tomorrow
  stare     sure       there      tonight
  start     table      these      tooth
  steal     tale       think      toy
  steam     talk       third      trace
  stocking  tardy      thirsty    Troy
  stole     tart       thirteen   true
  trust     water      while      wore
  Tuesday   weak       whip       work
  tug       wear       whipping   world
  turn      weather    whole      worth
  twelve    weave      whom       wrist
  twenty    Wednesday  wife       yard
  twist     week       wild       yeast
  upset     whale      wink       yellow
  vane      whatever   wire       yesterday
  wage      wheel      wolf       young
  walk      where      woe        your
  waste     which      won’t




  THE ALDINE SPELLER

  PART II

  FOURTH YEAR

[Illustration]


1

  A mer i ca
  A mer i can
  Pil grim
  moun tain
  free dom
  lib er ty
  it is
  ’tis


2

AMERICA

    My country, ’tis of thee,
    Sweet land of liberty,
        Of thee I sing;
    Land where my fathers died,
    Land of the Pilgrims’ pride,
    From every mountain-side
        Let freedom ring.

                                        --SAMUEL FRANCIS SMITH.


3

  breath
  breathes
  soul
  na tive

    Breathes there a man with soul so dead,
    Who never to himself hath said,
    “This is my own, my native land”?

                                        --SIR WALTER SCOTT.


          4                     5

  wolf      re ply      as sist      pit y
  wolves    re plied    poor         pit ied
        crea ture             a lone

See what happens to _y_ in _reply_ and _pity_ when _ed_ is added.

When _es_ is added to _wolf_ see what happens to _f_. In what other
words does this happen?


6

    One day a fox fell into a well. He howled aloud.

    A wolf ran to see what the matter was.

    “Poor creature,” said the wolf, “how I pity you!”

    “Don’t pity me,” replied the fox. “Assist me.”

                                        --ÆSOP.


           7                       8

  e nough    con tent    trav el       pock et
    tough    rich        trav el er    emp ty
    rough    a muse      purse         re cov er


9

  health    wealth    rob ber

  Health is the best wealth.

  Poor and content is rich, and rich enough.

                                        --SHAKESPEARE.

  Better an empty purse than an empty head.

                                        --GERMAN.

  The traveler with empty pockets fears no robber.


10

  be come    be gin         be gun       be fore
  be long    be gin ning    be low       be fore hand

[Illustration]


    11          12         13

  torn        stitch     trou ble
  tum ble     a cross    af ter ward
  a shamed    beg gar    loose
  nurse       pun ish    blis ter
  bruise      fault      her self
  comb        of fer     gar den

Look thoughtfully at _ui_ in _bruise_, _au_ in _fault_, _oo_ in
_loose_, _ou_ in _trouble_.

There is only one _c_ in _across_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Look at the picture, then write five sentences about it, using as many
words as you can from Lessons 11, 12, and 13.


14

  an ger     bos om    jus tice      win dow
         sur round              foot

    When anger in the bosom lies,
    Justice out the window flies.


         15                  16

  sil ver    lady        fur      elm
  shad y     lad ies     cur      sir
  shad ow    sat in     church    birch

The _y_ in _lady_ changes to _i_ and _es_ is added when we mean more
than one _lady_--_ladies_.

Look at the _u_ in _church_ and the _i_ in _birch_.


17

    The silver birch is a dainty lady,
    She wears a satin gown;
    The elm tree makes the old churchyard shady,
    She will not live in town.

                                        --EDITH NESBIT.


18

  voice       breeze       touch
    vi o let            breath

    The rough voiced breeze that shook the trees
    Was touched by a violet’s breath.


   19         20          21        22

  left       camp       nar row      fir
  cit y      lamp       ma ple     grove
  o’clock    damp       beech      drove
  front      called     spruce     stove
  path       field      for est     cove

Look at _o_ in _front_, _ie_ in _field_, and _ple_ in _maple_.

Do not forget the apostrophe in _o’clock_.


23

  We left the city at six o’clock.
  The camp is in a grove of fir, maple, beech, and spruce trees.
  Jack called the grove our forest.
  In front of the camp is the river.
  A narrow path leads across a field to its banks.


24

  lum ber    tim ber    boards    car pen ter
      shin gle               sea shore


   25           26         27           28

  build        inch       un der      re al ly
  build ing    inch es    be neath    porch
  built        firm       gi ant      dis tant
  south        sol id     whose       dis tance
  seems        fort       square      broad


29

  The camp was built of native lumber.

  The building was firm and solid as a fort.

  The boards were over an inch thick.

  It stood under a giant tree whose branches really seemed
  to touch the distant sky.

  On the south side was a broad square porch.


          30                 31

  ham mock  at tic     eaves     can dle
  buck et   cel lar    lan tern  moon light
       shov el             cor ner

Make a sentence telling how the camp was lighted at night.


     32        33           34            35

  di vide    break fast  pre pare       chance
  la bor     din ner     fish           watch
  e qual     sin ner     veg e ta ble   dan ger
  e qual ly  win ner     cot tage       stran ger
  en joy     pro vide    i dle          an y way

Look carefully at the second _e_ in _vegetable_.


36

  At camp the labor is divided. None are idle.

  All enjoy an equal chance to help.

  Jack prepares breakfast and dinner.

  Frank provides fish and vegetables.

  The dog watches that no danger comes near the cottage.


         37                   38

  cab bage  squash      ba na na   rai sins
  car rot   to ma to    cur rants  ol ive
  rad ish   tur nip     grape      prune
        on ion               lem on

[Illustration]


39

  kitch en         re move           ash es
            ov en           kin dle

  Remove the ashes.
  Kindle the fire.
  Have a hot oven.
  Sweep the kitchen.


   40         41         42         43

  salt     sprin kle    juice     cher ry
  so da     wrin kle    juic y    choc o late
  stir      pud ding    fork      dough
  spoon     bis cuit    pep per   dough nut
  coal      ket tle     pour      jel ly

[Illustration]


    44         45

  flow er    heav en
  show er    si lent
  bow er     de light
  tow er     high
  won der    mir ror


46

    The moon, like a flower,
    In heaven’s high bower,
    With silent delight
    Sits and smiles at the night.


FLOWER AND FAIRY WORDS


    47         48         49          50

  pur ple    na ture     ti ny       col or
  pan sy     fan cy      fair y      scar let
  li lac     blos som    fair ies    beau ti ful
  com mon    bush        fa vor      laugh ter
  wreath     lawn        mer ry      dan de li on


REVIEW OF TROUBLESOME WORDS


   51         52        53        54

  used       loose     wear      built
  color      lose      early     easy
  break      enough    sugar     beginning
  know       any       minute    wrote
  tonight    shoes     tear      sure
  laid       said      read      knew
  would      once      does      heard
  doctor     piece     just      writing
  write      having    says      whole
  often      guess     done      none

Each of the words on this page has some little “catch” in it. Try to
find what is difficult in each word. Make a list of all you misspell.
Keep this list on your desk or somewhere handy. Study whenever you get
a chance. Don’t let these simple, everyday words master you. _Master
them._


55

  o bey    com mand    busi ness    serve

Look at _e_ in obey, _i_ in _business_.

Only two syllables in _business_.

 He that has learned how to obey will know how to command.

                                        --SOLON.

 If you would have your business done, go; if not, send.

                                        --FRANKLIN.

 He is best served who serves himself.


         56                       57

  tru ly    po lite      re main        ac tion
  ounce     ex am ple    re main der    ad vice

No _e_ in _truly_; _ai_ in _remain_; _c_ in _advice_.

 Better an ounce of example than a pound of advice.

 Words pass away, but actions remain.

                                        --NAPOLEON.

 Truly polite, always polite.


    58          59

  lis ten      bud
  rip ple      bud ding
  flut ter     mud
  blue bird    mud dy
  to ward      fence

[Illustration]


60

      Listen a moment, I pray you;
    What was that sound that I heard?
      Wind in the budding branches,
              The ripple of brooks, or a bird?
      Hear it again, above us; and see a flutter of wings.
      The bluebird knows it is April, and soars toward the sun and
        sings.

                                        --EBEN REXFORD.


61

  bob o link       pi geon    spar row     hawk
          hand some             won der ful


    62        63           64         65

  bald       brief        aw ful     cir cle
  ea gle     grief        se vere    home
  ar row     com plete    ar rive    dome
  mur der    cru el       man age    Rome
  breast     wound        glance     bod y

Look at _a_ in _eagle_ and _breast_, _ie_ in _grief_ and _brief_, _e_
in _cruel_, _ou_ in _wound_.


66

THE EAGLE AND THE ARROW

[Illustration]

 A hunter once shot an eagle. Severely wounded, the bird managed to
 fly to his home. When he arrived he glanced at the cruel arrow in his
 breast. It was winged with one of his own feathers.

 “Oh,” he cried, “to think I have been murdered by an arrow that I
 helped to make!”

                                        --ÆSOP.


    67           68               69          70

  learn ing    in vite          har vest     boil
  wis dom      in vi ta tion    this tle     soil
  cloth        com pa ny        whis tle     toil
  clothes      pea cock         ex pect     toi let
  be gan       how ev er        in deed     suit


71

 Learning is not wisdom any more than cloth is clothes.

                                        --FRENCH.

 How can a sparrow expect to be invited into the company of a peacock?

                                        --HANS ANDERSEN.

 He that has a good harvest may be content with some thistles.

                                        --SCOTTISH.


      72                73

  calm    waist    debt     moan
  palm    crumb    mourn    col umn

Find a silent letter in every word in Lessons 72 and 73.


    74             75          76           77

  ad mire       great ness    death       thank ful
  ad mir ing    ab sent       at tempt    suc cess
  grum ble      pres ent      half        suc ceed
  grum bling    cow ard       halves      peo ple
  lev el        thous and     be cause    thorn

_E_ is omitted in _admire_ and _grumble_ when ing is added. What
changes are made in the word _half_ when we mean more than one half?


78

 In admiring greatness we rise to its level.

 He who killed a lion when absent, feared a mouse when present.

                                        --FRENCH.

 A coward dies a thousand deaths.

                                        --GERMAN.

 A bold attempt is half success.

                                        --DANISH.

 Some people are always grumbling because roses have thorns. I am
 thankful that thorns have roses.

                                        --KARR.

[Illustration]


79

  pal ace     hum ble     though      roam
        a mid       ’mid      pleas ure

    ’Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam,
    Be it ever so humble, there’s no place like home.

                                        --JOHN HOWARD PAYNE.

 Home is where love is.


    80          81          82           83

  wig wam    cup board    pi an o      cur tain
  cab in     cham ber     book case    so fa
  cas tle    par lor      al bum       vase
  pan try    bed room     blot ter     Bi ble
  clos et    bath room    car pet      quilt

[Illustration]


    84            85          86          87

  ache         bus i ly      chi na      wipe
  head ache    pleas ant     brit tle    fore noon
  ly ing       qui et ly     warm        a pron
  sur prise    quick ly      wash        tow el
  lin en       daugh ters    soft        fin ish

When _ly_ is added to _busy_, _y_ is changed to _i_.

There are _two s’s_ in _surprise_; one _l_ in _towel_.

Look at _ea_ in _pleasant_; _o_ in _apron_; _a_ in _wash_ and _warm_.

_Apron_ is pronounced _a pern_.


          88                       89

  sauce       rib bon     va ca tion    be tween
  sauc er     whis per    to geth er    scour
  plen ty     bas in      grate ful     praise


90

MOTHER’S HELPERS

Mother has a headache this forenoon and is lying down. Her two
daughters are working busily to give her a pleasant surprise.

“Work quietly and quickly, but carefully,” said Kate. “China is very
brittle. I’ll wash the dishes in warm water. You wipe them with this
soft linen towel. Between us we will soon finish.”


     91          92         93          94

  fam i ly    neph ew    neigh bor    mas ter
  grand pa    cous in    vis it or    tax
  grand ma    in fant    mem ber      ma chine
  aunt        wo man     butch er     fur nace
  un cle      wo men     gro cer      fu el


     95           96           97          98

  splen did       edge      ter ri ble     swept
  might y        ledge      storm          slept
  strength       wedge      ex plain     ten der
  up root ed    pledge      in stead    slen der
  straight      sledge      an swered    fen der


99

THE OAK AND THE REED

 A _mighty_ oak that had been uprooted by a _terrible_ storm, lay on
 the bank of a river.

 On the edge of the water grew a straight slender reed.

 “What, are you still growing!” said the oak. “I was big and strong.
 You are little and weak.”

 “I can _explain_,” _answered_ the reed. “You fought the _storm_ as it
 swept by. So you were _uprooted_ for all your _splendid_ strength.
 Instead of fighting the storm, I bent to it, and I still stand.”

                                        --ÆSOP.

Rewrite the above fable, using other words in place of those that are
italicized.


100

  a gainst
  de pends
  worth
  ton
  al ways

 A pound of pluck is worth a ton of luck.--

                                        GARFIELD.

 Luck is always against the man who depends upon it.


101

  li ar
  crip ple
  truth
  be lieve
  pun ish ment

 A liar is sooner caught than a cripple.

                                        --PORTUGUESE.

 A liar’s punishment is in not being believed when he speaks the truth.


102

  mod est
  mod est y
  sel dom
  jew el
  jew el ry
  much

 A modest dog seldom grows fat.

                                        --DANISH.

 Modesty is a jewel, but one may wear too much jewelry.

 Do noble things, not dream them, all day long.

                                        --KINGSLEY.


    103         104             105          106

  jour ney    ves sel          en gine      sta ble
  ca noe      car go           rail road    sta tion
  fer ry      cam el           rail way     de pot
  mo tor      bi cy cle        trol ley     ga rage
  har bor     au to mo bile    bal loon     pier

[Illustration]


107

  choice    sort       mount
  choose    pre fer    trip


108

  far ther    pub lic    rath er    de sire
  driv en     push       vis it     gone

What sort of travel do you prefer? You may have your choice. Mount
your bicycle for a short trip. If you desire to go farther, there is
the automobile or the public trolley. Or would you rather go by the
railroad?


    TRAVEL WORDS              GEOGRAPHY WORDS

   109        110             111           112

  a gent     rap id         vil lage       globe
  tick et    mo tion        cit ies        sphere
  de part    cap tain       cap i tal      ho ri zon
  de lay     of fi cer      con ti nent    lo cate
  ho tel     con duct or    val ley        north ern

Look at _tion_ in _motion_, the second _o_ in _conductor_, _ph_ in
_sphere_, the ending in _cities_. There are several words on this
page that you will misspell if you are not careful to pronounce them
correctly.


113

  wel come    serv ant    hun ger

 Welcome is the best dish on the table.

                                        --SCOTTISH.

 The master of the house is the servant of the guest.

                                        --PERSIAN.

 Hunger is the best sauce.


    114         115          116         117

  show er y    dawn        troop er     slope
  pow er       un less     hoop         rope
  warn         yel low     loop         scope
  in vade      with in     stoop        hope
  bu gle       with out    pa rade      hope ful
  held         their       pa rad ed    hop ing


118

THE DANDELIONS

[Illustration]

    Upon a showery night and still,
      Without a sound of warning,
    A trooper band surprised the hill,
      And held it in the morning.

    We were not waked by bugle-note,
      No cheer our dreams invaded,
    And yet at dawn their yellow coats
      On the green slopes paraded.

                                        --HELEN GRAY CONE.


    119         120            121           122

  sor ry      judge        for give ness    angry
  sor row     judg ing     pa tient         dis tress
  bor row     tongue       dis be lieve     dis tressed
  e vil       par don      re port          tale-bearer
  con duct    cheer ful    cour age         at ten tion

Look thoughtfully at _tongue_ and _patient_; the _o_ in _courage_ and
the _tion_ in _attention_.


123

There are ten things for which no one has ever yet been sorry. These
are--for doing good to all; for speaking evil of none; for hearing
before judging; for thinking before speaking; for holding an angry
tongue; for being kind to the distressed; for asking pardon for all
wrongs; for being patient towards everybody; for stopping the ears to a
tale-bearer; for disbelieving most of the ill reports.


    124          125        126        127

  Frank lin    per haps    sprout     wil low
  wharf        no tice     cheap      bil low
  Hol land     sin gle     leap       pil low
  else         tu lip      heap       U ni ted
  short        bulb        reap       States
  near ly      close       bas ket    morn ing


128

While Franklin was walking on a wharf one morning, he saw some cheap
willow baskets in which some tulip bulbs had been brought from Holland.
Perhaps no one else would have noticed the single short green sprout on
one of the willows. Franklin cut it off carefully and planted it. From
this one sprout have grown most of the basket willows in the United
States.

    A man’s best things are nearest him,
    Lie close about his feet.


WORDS OFTEN HEARD IN SCHOOL

    129          130         131          132

  pri ma ry    cor rect    ex act        his to ry
  writ ten     schol ar    ex er cise    charge
  prompt       er ror      jan i tor     en e my
  re peat      ex cuse     your self     can non
  ob serve     taught      col o ny      un der stand


    133          134         135          136

  neg lect     per fect     po em        a rith me tic
  un ion       lan guage    au thor      di vide
  at tack      cop y        sen tence    di vi sor
  chap ter     com ma       ti tle       div i dend
  liq uid      pe ri od     dic tate     sport


    137          138         139          140

  meas ure     curve        e rect       weigh
  min u end    carve        cough        weight
  bush el      up per       re cess      o mit
  draw ing     up right     base         mod el
  spel ling    re cite      base ball    an nu al

[Illustration]


    141          142          143          144

  pic nic      cot ton       wool        dif fer ent
  u su al      mus lin       wool en     dif fer ence
  jol ly       col lar       sweat       swamp
  ar ranged    neck tie      sweat er    par ty
  car riage    blouse        pas ture    lem on ade
  flan nel     o ver alls    or chard    co coa


145

THE PICNIC

Summer is the usual time for picnics, but mother arranged a jolly one
for us last fall.

Instead of cotton or muslin dresses, the girls wore flannel ones. The
boys left their collars and neckties at home, and wore old blouses and
overalls. We all wore woolen sweaters.

We did not go in carriages. We walked across the pasture, through the
orchard to the grove on the other side of the swamp. Ours was a nutting
party.

Our picnic was different from summer picnics in other ways. Instead of
cold lemonade we had hot cocoa, and we ate our lunch in the sunniest
place we could find, by a great rock. It was almost night when we
reached home, and we all ran to the fire to warm our fingers and toes.


146

Make a sentence using the following words.

  scat tered       crowd  de cid ed     search
          chest nuts             wal nuts


          147                     148

  sand wich    fudge       squir rel    club
  pic kle      chick en    a corn       tur key
  nap kin      hun gry     rab bit      crick et


    149           150             151            152

  false         hon est         prom ise       faith
  false hood    hon est y       birth          faith ful
  quar rel      no ble          knight         how ev er
  val or        hon or          knight hood    loy al
  for tune      hon or a ble    what ev er     loy al ty


153

    He who is honest is noble,
    Whatever his fortunes or birth.

                                        --ALICE CARY.

 Stand by your promise, your honor, your faith, as loyally as the
 knights of old.

                                        --GEORGE HERBERT.

[Illustration:

  BRAVE GOOD
        AND·TRUE
]

Here are some of the most commonly used, most commonly misspelled,
words. You have studied every one of them. Are you sure that you can
and do spell every one correctly?

  piece      raise     busy       write
  beginning  wrote     color      writing
  though     enough    guess      here
  coming     truly     says       hear
  early      sugar     believe    done
  instead    straight  knew       women
  easy       could     February   always
  through    much      Wednesday  where
  every      minute    lose       been
  half       Tuesday   loose      friend
  none       wear      would      business
  often      answer    once       money
  cough      trouble   does       their
  ache       among     heard      there
  break      said      know       sure


FOURTH YEAR VOCABULARY

  absent      amuse      attention   bedroom
  ache        anger      attic       beech
  acorn       angry      aunt        before
  across      annual     author      beforehand
  action      answered   automobile  beggar
  admire      any        awful       begin
  admiring    anyway     bald        beginning
  advice      apron      balloon     begun
  afterward   arithmetic banana      believe
  against     arranged   base        belong
  agent       arrive     baseball    below
  album       arrow      basket      beneath
  alone       ashamed    basin       between
  always      ashes      bathroom    Bible
  America     assist     beautiful   bicycle
  American    attack     because     billow
  amid        attempt    become      birch
  birth       breathes   cabin       chance
  biscuit     breeze     called      chapter
  blister     brief      calm        charge
  blossom     brittle    camel       cheap
  blotter     broad      camp        cheerful
  blouse      bruise     candle      cherry
  bluebird    bucket     cannon      chestnuts
  boards      bud        canoe       chicken
  bobolink    bugle      capital     china
  body        build      captain     chocolate
  boil        building   cargo       choice
  bookcase    built      carpenter   choose
  borrow      bulb       carpet      church
  bosom       bush       carriage    circle
  bower       bushel     carrot      cities
  break       busily     carve       city
  breakfast   business   castle      close
  breast      butcher    cellar      closet
  breath      cabbage    chamber     cloth
  clothes     corner     curve       disbelieve
  club        correct    damp        distance
  coal        cottage    dandelion   distant
  cocoa       cotton     danger      distress
  collar      cough      daughter    distressed
  colony      courage    dawn        divide
  color       cousin     death       dividend
  column      cove       debt        divisor
  comb        coward     decided     doctor
  comma       creature   delay       does
  command     cricket    delight     dome
  common      cripple    depart      done
  company     crowd      depend      dough
  complete    cruel      depot       doughnut
  conduct     crumb      desire      drawing
  conductor   cupboard   dictate     driven
  content     cur        difference  drove
  continent   currants   different   eagle
  copy        curtain    dinner      early
  easy        expect     firm        garage
  eaves       explain    fish        garden
  edge        fairies    flannel     giant
  elm         fairy      flower      glance
  else        faith      flutter     globe
  empty       faithful   foot        gone
  enemy       false      forenoon    grandma
  engine      falsehood  forest      grandpa
  enjoy       family     forgiveness grape
  enough      fancy      fork        grateful
  equal       farther    fort        greatness
  equally     fault      fortune     grief
  erect       favor      Franklin    grocer
  error       fence      freedom     grove
  evil        fender     front       grumble
  exact       ferry      fudge       grumbling
  example     field      fuel        guess
  excuse      finish     fur         half
  exercise    fir        furnace     halves
  hammock     honor      invite      know
  handsome    honorable  janitor     labor
  harbor      hoop       jelly       ladies
  harvest     hope       jewel       lady
  having      hopeful    jewelry     laid
  hawk        horizon    jolly       lamp
  headache    hotel      journey     language
  health      however    judge       lantern
  heap        humble     judging     laughter
  heard       hunger     juice       lawn
  heaven      hungry     juicy       leap
  held        idle       just        learning
  herself     inch       justice     ledge
  high        inches     kettle      left
  history     indeed     kindle      lemon
  Holland     infant     kitchen     lemonade
  home        instead    knew        level
  honest      invade     knight      liar
  honesty     invitation knighthood  liberty
  lilac       mid        murder      offer
  linen       mighty     muslin      officer
  liquid      minuend    napkin      often
  listen      minute     narrow      olive
  locate      mirror     native      omit
  loop        moan       nature      once
  loose       model      nearly      onion
  lose        modest     necktie     orchard
  loyal       modesty    neglect     ounce
  loyalty     moonlight  neighbor    oven
  lumber      morning    nephew      overalls
  lying       motion     noble       palace
  machine     motor      none        palm
  manage      mount      northern    pansy
  maple       mountain   notice      pantry
  master      mourn      nurse       parade
  measure     much       obey        paraded
  member      mud        observe     pardon
  merry       muddy      o’clock     parlor
  party       pity       provide     rather
  pasture     pleasant   prune       read
  path        pleasure   public      really
  patient     pledge     pudding     reap
  peacock     plenty     punish      recess
  people      pocket     punishment  recite
  pepper      poem       purple      recover
  perfect     polite     purse       remain
  perhaps     poor       push        remainder
  period      porch      quarrel     remove
  piano       pour       quickly     repeat
  pickle      power      quietly     replied
  picnic      praise     quilt       reply
  piece       prefer     rabbit      report
  pier        prepare    radish      ribbon
  pigeon      present    railroad    rich
  pilgrim     primary    railway     ripple
  pillow      promise    raisins     roam
  pitied      prompt     rapid       robber
  Rome        sentence   slept       spruce
  rope        servant    slope       square
  rough       serve      soda        squash
  said        severe     sofa        squirrel
  salt        shadow     soft        stable
  sandwich    shady      soil        station
  satin       shingle    solid       stir
  sauce       shoes      sorrow      stitch
  saucer      short      sorry       stone
  says        shovel     sort        stoop
  scarlet     shower     soul        storm
  scattered   showery    sparrow     stove
  scholar     silent     spelling    straight
  scope       silver     sphere      stranger
  scour       single     splendid    strength
  search      sinner     spoon       strict
  seashore    sir        sport       succeed
  seems       sledge     sprinkle    success
  seldom      slender    sprout      sugar
  suit        thousand   travel      upper
  sure        ticket     traveler    upright
  surprise    timber     trip        uprooted
  surround    tiny       trolley     used
  swamp       ’tis       trooper     usual
  sweat       title      trouble     vacation
  sweater     together   truly       valley
  swept       toil       truth       valor
  tale-bearer toilet     tulip       vase
  taught      tomato     tumble      vegetable
  tax         ton        turkey      vessel
  tear        tongue     turnip      village
  tender      tonight    uncle       violet
  terrible    torn       under       visit
  thankful    touch      understand  visitor
  their       tough      union       voice
  thistle     toward     unite       waist
  thorn       towel      united      walnuts
  though      tower      unless      warm
  warn        whisper    without     wound
  wash        whistle    wolf        wreath
  watch       whole      wolves      wrinkle
  wealth      whose      woman       write
  wear        wigwam     women       writing
  wedge       willow     wonder      written
  weigh       window     wonderful   wrote
  weight      winner     wool        yellow
  welcome     wipe       woolen      yourself
  wharf       wisdom     worth
  whatever    within     would

[Illustration:

  VAN REES
  PRESS

  NEW YORK
]

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s note


Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ALDINE SPELLER, PART TWO ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.