Transcriber’s Notes:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

The whole number part of a mixed fraction is separated from the
fractional part with -, for example, 2-1/2.

Additional Transcriber’s Notes are at the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADOBE DAYS

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: LLEWELLYN BIXBY

Aet. 33]

       *       *       *       *       *




ADOBE DAYS


  BEING THE TRUTHFUL NARRATIVE OF THE EVENTS IN THE
  LIFE OF A CALIFORNIA GIRL ON A SHEEP RANCH AND IN
  EL PUEBLO DE NUESTRA SEÑORA DE LOS ANGELES
  WHILE IT WAS YET A SMALL AND HUMBLE TOWN;
  TOGETHER WITH AN ACCOUNT OF HOW THREE
  YOUNG MEN FROM MAINE IN EIGHTEEN HUNDRED
  AND FIFTY-THREE DROVE SHEEP AND CATTLE
  ACROSS THE PLAINS, MOUNTAINS AND DESERTS
  FROM ILLINOIS TO THE PACIFIC COAST; AND
  THE STRANGE PROPHECY OF ADMIRAL
  THATCHER ABOUT SAN PEDRO HARBOR

  BY
  SARAH BIXBY-SMITH

  [Illustration]

  REVISED EDITION

  THE TORCH PRESS
  CEDAR RAPIDS, IOWA
  1926

       *       *       *       *       *

  _Copyright 1925 by
  Sarah Bixby-Smith_

  _Second Edition, 1926_

  The Torch Press
  CEDAR RAPIDS
  IOWA

       *       *       *       *       *

  _To My Father_

  LLEWELLYN BIXBY

  Born in Norridgewock, Maine October 4, 1825
  Arrived in San Francisco, July 7, 1851
  Died in Los Angeles, December 5, 1896




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER

     I BACKGROUND                         11

    II THE VERY LITTLE GIRL               18

   III DOWN IN MAINE                      32

    IV FATHER’S STORY                     45

     V DRIVING SHEEP ACROSS THE PLAINS    55

    VI RANCHO SAN JUSTO                   69

   VII LOS ALAMITOS AND LOS CERRITOS      76

  VIII THE RANCH STORY CONTINUED         109

    IX FLOCKS AND HERDS                  125

     X EL PUEBLO DE NUESTRA SEÑORA LA
         REINA DE LOS ANGELES            133

    XI MORE ABOUT LOS ANGELES            151

   XII THE BACK COUNTRY AND THE ADMIRAL  164

  XIII SCHOOL DAYS                       185

   XIV PIONEERING AT POMONA COLLEGE      194

    XV CONCLUSION                        208




FOREWORD


Several years ago I wrote a short account of my childhood, calling it
_A Little Girl of Old California_. At the suggestion of friends, I have
expanded the material to make this book.

The recent discovery of diaries kept by Dr. Thomas Flint during two
pioneer trips to this coast which he made in company with my father,
and the generous permission to make use of them granted me by his
sons, Mr. Thomas Flint and Mr. Richard Flint, have added much to the
interest of the subject. I at first contemplated including them in this
volume, but it has seemed wiser to publish them separately and they
are now available through the publications of the Southern California
Historical Society.

My information regarding the earlier history of the Cerritos Ranch was
supplemented by data given me by my cousin, the late George H. Bixby.

The interesting letter predicting the development of the harbor at San
Pedro, written by Admiral Henry Knox Thatcher to my grandfather, Rev.
George W. Hathaway, is the gift of my aunt, Miss Martha Hathaway.

I wish here to express my gratitude to my husband, Paul Jordan
Smith, and to my friend, Mrs. Hannah A. Davidson, for their constant
encouragement to me during the preparation of _Adobe Days_.

  SARA BIXBY-SMITH

  Claremont, California
  October, 1925

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE TO SECOND EDITION

For certain suggestions and information which have been incorporated in
this revised edition I wish to thank Mrs. Mary S. Gibson, Mrs. D. G.
Stephens, Prof. Jose Pijoan and Mr. Charles Francis Saunders.

  S. B. S.

  Sept. 1926.




CHAPTER I BACKGROUND


I was born on a sheep ranch in California, the San Justo, near San Juan
Bautista, an old mission town of the Spanish padres, which stands in
the lovely San Benito Valley, over the hills from Monterey and about a
hundred miles south of San Francisco.

The gold days were gone and the time of fruit and small farms had not
yet come. On the rolling hills the sheep went softly, and in vacant
valleys cropped the lush verdure of the springtime, or, in summer,
sought a scanty sustenance in the sun-dried grasses.

Intrepid men had pushed the railroad through the forbidding barrier of
the Sierras, giving for the first time easy access to California, and
thus making inevitable a changed manner of life and conditions.

I am a child of California, a grand-child of Maine, and a
great-grand-child of Massachusetts. Fashions in ancestry change. When
I chose mine straight American was still very correct; so I might as
well admit at once that I am of American colonial stock, Massachusetts
variety.

Up in the branches of my ancestral tree I find a normal number of
farmers, sea-captains, small manufacturers, squires, justices of the
peace, and other town officers, members of the general court, privates
in the militia, majors, colonels, one ghost, one governor, and seven
passengers on that early emigrant ship, the Mayflower; but a great
shortage of ministers, there being only one.

How I happened to be born so far away from the home of my ancestors,
the type of life lived here on the frontier by a transplanted New
England family, and the conditions that prevailed in California in the
period between the mining rush and the tourist rush, is the story I
shall tell.

The usual things had happened down the years on the east
coast,--births, marryings, many children, death; new generations,
scatterings, the settling and the populating a new land. Mother’s
people stayed close to their original Plymouth corner, but father’s had
frequently moved on to new frontiers. They went into Maine about the
time of the Revolution, when it was still a wilderness, and then, by
the middle of the next century, they were all through the opening west.

My father was Llewellyn Bixby of Norridgewock, Maine, and my mother
was Mary Hathaway, youngest daughter of Reverend George Whitefield
Hathaway, my one exception to the non-ministerial rule of the family.
And he was this by force of his very determined mother, Deborah
Winslow, who had made up her mind that her handsome young son should
enter the profession at that time the most respected in the community.
She was a woman called “set as the everlasting hills,” and so
determined was she that Whitefield should not be lured off into ways of
business that she would not allow him to be taught arithmetic. Like
the usual boy he rebelled at dictation, and when at Brown University
became a leader in free-thinking circles, but suddenly was converted
and accepted his mother’s dictum. His own choice would have been to
follow in the footsteps of his father, Washington Hathaway, a graduate
of Brown and a lawyer. His sermons showed his inheritance of a legal
mind, and he exhibited always a tolerance and breadth of spirit that
were doubtless due to the tempering of his mother’s orthodoxy by his
gentle father’s unitarianism. She, dear lady, would not have her
likeness made by the new daguerreotype process lest she break the
command, “Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, nor any
likeness of anything--.”

Grandfather graduated from Williams College and Andover Seminary and
accepted the call to the parish church of Bloomfield (Skowhegan),
Maine, which position he held for a generation. Afterward he was
several times member of the Maine Legislature and was, during the Civil
War, chaplain in the 19th Regiment of Maine Volunteers. When I was
still a child he came to California and spent the last years of his
life in our home.

My father’s family had been in Maine for a longer time, his two
great grandfathers, Samuel Bixby and Joseph Weston, going in from
Massachusetts about 1770, and settling on the Kennebec River. Joseph
Weston took his eleven year old son with him in the spring to find a
location and prepare for his family to come in the fall. In September
he left his boy and another of fourteen in charge of the cattle and
cabin and went home to get his wife and other children. But he was
balked in his purpose because of the setting in of an early winter and
consequent freezing of the river highway. The boys had to stay alone in
the woods caring for the cattle until spring made travel possible. When
the family arrived they found the boys and cattle in good shape, the
boys evidently being excellent Yankee pioneers.

By the middle of the nineteenth century Somerset County was full of
Bixbys and Westons. When Rufus Bixby entertained at Thanksgiving dinner
on one occasion he had one hundred fifty-six guests, all kinfolk. He
was a brother of my grandfather, Amasa Bixby, the two of them having
married sisters, Betsey and Fanny Weston. A third sister, Electa
Weston, married William Reed Flint and became the mother of the two
cousins who were father’s business associates all during his California
life.

The Maine farms were becoming crowded and there was no land in the
neighborhood left for the young folks. Father was one of an even
hundred grandchildren of Benjamin Weston and Anna Powers, a sample of
the prevalent size of families at that time. The early American farmers
were not essentially of the soil, but were driven by the necessities of
a new country to wring support from the land. At the first opportunity
to escape into callings where more return for less physical output
promised, they fled the farms. I remember that my uncle Jotham who had
rather short stumpy fingers used to maintain that he had worn them
down in his boyhood gathering up stones in the home pastures and piling
them into walls.

In the spring of 1851, Llewellyn Bixby, an erect, square-shouldered
young man of twenty-five, with gray eyes and black hair, was studying
engineering at Waterville. He had finished his education at a district
school and Bloomfield Academy some time before and had taught, had
farmed, had even undertaken the business of selling books from house to
house, for which latter effort he confessed he did not seem to have the
requisite qualities. He then determined to go into engineering, a field
of growing opportunity, and was well underway when one day his father
appeared unexpectedly at the door of a shop where he was at work, with
the proposal that he join his brother, Amasa, Jr., and his cousin, Dr.
Thomas Flint, in a trip to California, whither the latter’s brother,
Benjamin, had gone in 1849.

The plan appealed to him and he returned to Norridgewock with his
father, to make an immediate start for that far off coast which was to
prove his home for the rest of his life.

It was July, 1851, just too late to be technically called pioneers,
that they reached San Francisco, but to all intents and purposes they
belong to that group of early comers to this state who have had so
large a part in determining its destiny.

The next year, two more of my father’s brothers, Marcellus and Jotham,
ventured around the Horn, and ultimately the rest of the children
followed,--Amos, Henry, Solomon, George, Francina and Nancy, (Mrs.
William Lovett), making in all eight brothers and two sisters. Amos who
was the last to come, was a lawyer and editor and had been instrumental
in the founding of Grinnell College in Iowa and the University of
Colorado in Boulder as he made his gradual progress from Maine to
California. He founded and edited the first newspaper in Long Beach.

Allen Bixby, now state commander of the American Legion is the grandson
of Amasa, the brother who accompanied my father in the first trip
across the isthmus. It is this sort of bodily transplanting of young
stock that has left so many of the New England counties bereft of
former names, but has built up in new communities many of the customs
and traditions of the older civilization.

Not only did my father’s immediate family come to this state but also
many of his friends and cousins. I am told that at the presidential
election in 1860 all the men in Paso Robles who voted for Lincoln came
from Somerset county, Maine.

Because this migration is typical and because many of these cousins
made names for themselves beyond the limits of the family, I am going
to mention a few of them.

Among them was, for instance, Dr. Mary Edmands, who was an early
physician in San Francisco in the days when it took grit as well as
brains for a woman to gain a medical education. She succeeded as a
mother as well as a professional woman, her sons and daughter at
present standing high in their respective callings.

Nathan Blanchard of Santa Paula was a son of still another Weston
sister. He, after many hardships and almost unbelievable patience,
succeeded in making a success of lemon culture in Southern California,
and worked out the fundamental principle of curing the fruit that is
now in vogue wherever lemons are grown for market.

Another name widely known is that of Mrs. Frank Gibson, the daughter of
another cousin. She has been a leader among women for many years, and
member of the State Board of Immigration. Her son, Hugh Gibson, is at
present United States Minister to Switzerland.

These are but a few of the several hundred from this one Maine family
who are scattered up and down this western land.




CHAPTER II THE VERY LITTLE GIRL


I was born, as I have said, on a sheep ranch in the central part of
California during its pastoral period, but it is doubtless true that
the environment and influences about me during the first few months of
my life were very little different from what they would have been had
my Maine mother not left her New England home about a year before my
birth.

But as the months passed and the circle of my experience widened, I was
more and more affected by the conditions of my own time and place.

My first memory relates to an experience characteristic of a frontier
country in which the manner of life is still primitive. I remember
very distinctly sitting in my mother’s lap in a stage-coach and being
unbearably hot and thirsty. After I was a grown girl my father took
me with him to inspect the last remaining link of the old stage lines
(between Santa Barbara and Santa Ynez), that formally ran up and down
the state from San Diego to San Francisco, and I, being reminded of
that long ride in my babyhood, asked him about it. He told me that
on the return trip to San Juan after my first visit to Los Angeles,
instead of going north by steamer they had traveled by stage through
the San Joaquin Valley, encountering the worst heat he had ever
experienced in California. Then he added that I could not possibly
remember anything about it since I was only eleven months old when it
happened. I maintain, however, that I do, because the picture and the
sense of heat is too vivid to be a matter of hearsay alone. I was so
small that my head came below my mother’s shoulder as I leaned against
her outside arm at the left end of the middle seat. There were no other
women in the stage, papa was behind us, and opposite were three men,
who were sorry for me and talked to me.

The months went by and I came to know my home. It was among rolling
hills whose velvety slopes bounded my world. Over all was the wide
blue sky, a bit of it having fallen into a nearby hollow. This was a
fascinating pond, for water ran up hill beside the road to get into
it. Then there were many fish, none of which ever would get caught on
my bent-pin hook. It was into this water that I once saw some little
ducks jump, and, like many of the younger generation, greatly alarm
their mother, who, being a hen, had no understanding of her children’s
adjustment to strange conditions.

The ranch house was a new one, built by the three partner-cousins,
large enough to accommodate their families. It was reminiscent of
Maine, with its white paint, green blinds and sharp gables edged with
wooden lace, something like the perforated paper in the boxes of
perfumed toilet soap,--perhaps meant to remind them of icicles. The
house and all the auxiliary buildings were built on rising ground, so
that under each one, on the lower side, was a high basement, usually
enclosed by a lattice. Under the veranda that extended across the
front of the house was a fine place to play, with many treasures to be
found, among them sacks of the strange beet seed, reminders of an early
interest in sugar-making, and sweet potatoes that are very good for
nibbling, raw; they taste like chestnuts.

At the rear of this house was a low porch, without a railing, where
the carriages drove up many times a day, for, with the large family,
the wide acres, and active business, there was much coming and going.
This veranda served as an annex to the dining room. In those days fruit
came after breakfast instead of before, and it was here that we ate it,
tossing the squeezed oranges and the scalloped watermelon rinds into a
conveniently placed box that was frequently emptied.

Directly back of the kitchen was a small building containing a
storeroom where Dick and I were accustomed to climb the shelves like a
ladder for packages of sweet chocolate, while Aunt Francina, oblivious,
skimmed the many large milk pans. In the building also was a laundry,
containing a stove upon which I have seen soft-soap made and tallow
prepared for the candle moulds. In a corner, made by this house and a
retaining wall, was a large sand pile, and from the great oak on the
bank above hung a long swing. I wonder if it is any more delightful for
an old person to penetrate the sky in an aeroplane than for a little
girl to do the same when pushed by the strong arm of her father.

Down towards the pond was the horse barn, with its long rows of stalls
on one side, and its shelter for the carts and buggies beside the
hay-mow on the other. I was warned of dangerous heels and was duly
circumspect, but liked to get, occasionally, a nice, fresh, long hair
from a tail for purposes of scientific experiment. I was going to turn
a hair into a snake if possible. In a similar attempt to verify popular
statements I spent many an hour with salt in my hand, trailing birds.

On one of my ventures behind the horses I was rewarded by the discovery
of a very heavy little bottle, standing on a dark ledge. It contained
mercury. Great was my joy to get a few drops in my hand, to divide them
into the tiniest globules, and then to watch them coalesce into one
little silvery pool.

The building standing back up the hill was the one in which the
imported Spanish merino sheep were kept. I seldom went there, but in
the corral behind the barn next lower several cows stood every night
to be milked, among them Old Muley, my friend, on whose broad back I
often sat astride while the process was going on. There were large,
pink-blossomed mallows bordering the fences and this barn, and under
the latter many white geese could be seen between the slats of the open
siding. How excited I was when the day for gathering the feathers came!

The hired men occupied the original ranch house; in the usual basement
was the tool room, open to us children. I here learned to hammer,
saw and plane, and, most charming of all, bore holes with an auger in
the wooden boxes we used in the making of figure-four traps. I also
learned about gimlets, chisels, pliers, brads, rivets, and screws and
thus prepared myself to be a general handy man at college and in my own
home. It was in this shop that papa made me a fire-cracker holder,--a
willow stick with a hole bored in one end in which to place the lovely
red symbol of patriotism, so that I could celebrate without endangering
my fingers.

In front of the house was the flower garden, enclosed by a white picket
fence as a protection against chickens and other wandering ranch
animals. Ladies-delights turned up their smiling little faces beside
one walk, and nearby grew papa’s favorites, cinnamon pinks. I liked the
red honey-suckle and the dark mourning-brides that were like velvet
cushions stuck full of white-headed pins. There was one orange tree
that bore no fruit important enough for me to remember, but, in spring,
had many waxy white blossoms that smelled so good it made one hurt
inside.

In larger enclosures, bounded by the same white fencing, grew
vegetables and fruit trees. Sometimes we pulled a pungent horse-radish
root and pretended that a bite of it made us crazy, an excuse for much
running and wild gesticulation. Under a long row of loaded blackberry
vines Dick once asked me the riddle, “Why is a blackberry like a
newspaper?” Do you know the answer? It is: “Both are black and white
and red all over.” I presume the play upon the word “red” was my
introduction to puns.

The orchard contained peaches, plums, pears, apples, and apricots, but,
to my mind, the cherry trees were the chief glory. One evening while
Annie Mooney, our nurse, was taking in some clothes from the line, my
little sister and I had a feast of fallen cherries, but she ate with
less discrimination than I, for when, a few minutes later, we drank
our supper milk she had convulsions. A quick immersion in a tub of hot
water cured her, and we had learned about babies and cherries and milk,
all mixed up together.

Down in the far corner of the orchard was a spring, with marshy ground
about it, where the children were forbidden to go. But one morning,
bored by the lack of novelty in our lives, one of the Flint twins and I
boldly ventured into the tabooed region. We had hardly arrived when we
saw an enormous black snake, which drove us back in terror, chasing us,
with glittering eyes and darting tongue, over the ridges and hollows of
the new-ploughed ground that clutched at our feet as if in collusion
with the black dragon guard of the spring. I laid, during those few
minutes, the foundation for many a horror-stricken dream. The snake
was real. I wonder if the pursuit was merely the imagining of a guilty
conscience.

Beyond the summer house, beyond the fence and at the hilltop end of a
little grassy path, was the family burying ground, where, under the
wild flowers, lay a few baby cousins who had gone away before I came,
and papa’s young brother, Solomon, who, while reading poetry in a
lonely sheep camp, had been shot to death by some unknown hand.

Our home was in a little valley, with no other houses in sight, but
a mile and a half away, down a hill and across a bridge, lay the old
town of San Juan Bautista, with its post-office, store, adobe inn and
its homes, a medley of Spanish and American types. The mission church
with its long corridor, arched and tile-paved, and its garden, where
peacocks used to walk and drop their shining feathers for a little girl
to pick up, was the dominating feature of the place, its very cause for
being. Inside was dim silence; there were strange dark pictures on the
walls, and burning candles, a very large music book with big square
notes, and a great Bible, chained to its desk.

There was another church in San Juan, one that was wooden, light, bare
and small, where I learned from a tiny flowered card, “Blessed are the
peacemakers,” which, being interpreted for my benefit, meant, “Sallie
mus’n’t quarrel with little sister.” I ate up a rosebud and wriggled in
my seat during the long sermon and wondered about the lady who brushed
her hair smooth and low on one side and high on the other. Had she only
one ear?

I have been told that my church attendance involved certain
distractions for my fellow-worshippers, and that my presence was
tolerated only because of the desirability of training me in correct
Sunday habits. On one occasion my restlessness led me into disaster. My
parents had gone to the chancel, carrying my little sister Anne for
her christening, leaving me in the pew. It was a strange performance.
The minister took the baby in his arms, and then put something from a
silver bowl on her forehead, and began to pray. I must know what was in
the bowl! Everybody had shut-eyes, so there was a good chance for me
to find out without troubling anyone. I darted forward and managed to
discover that the mysterious something was water, for I spilled it over
myself.

The trip to church was made in a two-seated, low carriage, with a span
of horses, while my every day rides with papa were in a single buggy,
but with two horses, also, for we had far to go and liked going fast.
Sometimes we went to Gilroy, and sometimes to Hollister, often just
about the ranch to the various sheep camps, which were widely separated.

I began these business trips almost as soon as I was old enough to sit
up alone. When we started I would be very erect and alert at papa’s
side, but before long I would droop and be retired to the bottom of
the buggy, where, wrapped in a robe, and with his foot for a pillow,
I would sleep contentedly for hours. I remember my disgust when I had
grown so long that I must change my habit and put my legs back under
the seat, instead of lying across in the correct way. I objected to
change, but was persuaded that it would be inconvenient for me to get
tangled, during some pleasant dream, in the actualities of the spokes
of a moving wheel.

At one time papa and I were very much occupied clearing a field, a
piece of work which he must have reserved for himself, since there
were no other men about. He also enjoyed chopping wood and this may
have been his “daily dozen.” We cut down several large oak trees,
cleared out underbrush, and, piling it up against the great stumps,
built fires that roared for a time and then smouldered for days.

Sometimes I walked with mamma on the hills back of the house, and when
we were tired we would sit down under a tree and she would tell me a
story and make me a chaplet of oak leaves, folding and fastening each
leaf to the next in a most ingenious way. If our walk took us into the
lower lands she made bewitching little baskets from the rushes that
grew near the water’s edge. I also found the strange equisitum, that I
sometimes called “horse-tail,” and sometimes “stove-pipe,” which latter
I preferred, because none of the horses that I knew had disjointable
tails, while the little hollow tubes of stem that fitted into each
other so well must serve the fairies most excellently for their
chimneys.

Several spring mornings as I grew older, I got up at dawn with mamma,
went to the early empty kitchen for a drink of milk, and then went out
with her for a horseback ride, she in her long broadcloth habit and
stiff silk hat, and I, a tiny timid girl, perched on a side-saddle atop
a great horse. From the point of view of horsemanship I was not a great
success, but the joy of the dawn air, the rising sun, the wild-flowers,
the companionship of my mother is mine forever.

It was on one of these morning expeditions when we were comparing
notes about our tastes in colors, that I found she liked a strange
shade of red that to me looked unattractive. I was overwhelmed by the
thought that perhaps it did not look the same to both of us, and that
if I saw it as she did I might like it also; but there was no way for
either of us to know how it actually looked to the other! I realized
the essential isolation of every human being. However, I forgot the
loneliness when papa joined us on the road beside the pond, where the
wild lilac scattered its blue-violet lace on the over-hanging bank, and
cut for me a willow whistle that sounded the shrill joy of being alive.

On the Sunday afternoon walks when we all went up into the hills
together I learned, among other classics:

  “Little drops of water,
     Little grains of sand,
   Make a mighty ocean
     And the wondrous land.”

But it was at night when I was safely put in my bed that I heard
through the open door, mamma, at the parlor piano, singing to me:

  “I want to be an angel,
     And with the angels stand,
   A crown upon my head,
     A harp within my hand.”

I suppose that neither she nor I were really in immediate haste for
the fulfillment of that wish, but it made a good bed-time song.
Another favorite was, _Shall we Gather at the River?_, and there was
occasionally a somber one called _Pass Under the Rod_.

My bed was a very safe place, for did not angels guard it, “two at the
foot, and two at the head”? I knew who my angels were,--my very own
grandmother, who had died when my mother was a new baby, the aunt for
whom I had been named, my little cousin Mary who really should have
been guarding her brother Harry, and a fourth whom I have now forgotten.

The songs were not gay, but my life was not troubled by thoughts of
death. Heaven seemed a nice place, somewhere, and angels and fairies
were normal parts of my universe.

I did have a few minor troubles. My language was criticized. “You bet
your boots” did not meet with maternal approval. Then, if I carelessly
put my sunbonnet strings into my mouth, I got my tongue burned from
the vinegar and cayenne pepper into which they had been dipped for the
express purpose of making the process disagreeable. Those sunbonnets,
with which my head was sheathed every time I started out into the airy
out-of-doors, were my chief pests. I usually compromised my integrity
by untying the strings as soon as I was out of sight. I would double
back the corners of the bonnet, making it into a sort of cocked hat
with a bow on top, made from the hated strings, thus letting my poor
scratched ears out of captivity.

My cousin, Mrs. Gibson, tells me that she also suffered the martyrdom
of sunbonnets; I suppose in those days girls were supposed to preserve
natural complexions, it not being considered decent to have recourse
to vanity boxes. Her mother was more ingenious than mine in making sure
that her child did not jeopardize her skin. She made buttonholes in the
top of the bonnet through which she drew strands of hair and braided
them outside the bonnet, thus insuring it against removal.

Papa and I went to the circus on every possible occasion. Once,
at Hollister, I saw General and Mrs. Tom Thumb, Minnie Warren and
Commodore Nutt, whose photograph--with Mr. Barnum--I have preserved.
Minnie Warren was supposed to be the size of a six-year-old, but the
standard for six-year-olds must have come out of the east. I was
several inches taller than she.

A pretty lady, dressed in pink tarleton skirts, who rode several horses
at a time, and jumped through tissue paper hoops, was my first heroine.
Dick and I kept her picture for months on a ledge under the office
desk, and there rendered her frequent homage.

The mention of this desk calls to mind other activities centering in
that office. On one occasion, when I was suitably young, the spirit
moved me to carry a shovelful of live coals out through the door to the
porch, and there coax up a fire by the addition of kindling wood. The
same spirit, or another, however, suggested a compensating action. I
summoned my mother to see my “nice fire,” to the salvation of the house.

Fire, candles, matches, revolvers, all held a fascination. It is
evident that neither my cousin Harry nor I were intended for a violent
death, for it was our custom to investigate from time to time his
father’s loaded revolver, turning the chambers about and removing
and replacing the cartridges. Our faith in our ability to handle the
dangerous weapon safely seems to have been justified by our success.

It was deemed wise to keep me occupied, so far as possible, in order
to thwart Satan, ever on the lockout for idle hands. So I was taught
to sew patch-work and to knit, to read and to spell. There were short
periods when I had to stay in the house, but like most California
children, I spent out of doors most of the time not given over to
eating and sleeping. Now-a-days even those duties are attended to upon
porches.

Under mamma’s guidance I once laboriously and secretly sewed “over and
over” a gray and striped “comfort bag” for a birthday gift to papa. It
was modelled on the bags made for the soldiers in the Union army when
my mother was a girl. We made a special trip to Hollister to buy its
contents, black and white thread, coarse needles, buttons, wax, blunt
scissors, and to top off, pink and white sugary peppermint drops. That
bag remained in service for twenty years, going always in father’s
satchel whenever he went away. It came to my rescue once when I had
torn my skirt from hem to band. As he sewed up the rent for me with
nice big stitches, first on one side and then on the other, he told me
it was a shoemaker’s stitch and had the advantage of bringing the edges
together just as they had been originally, without puckering the cloth.
Mamma used the same stitch to mend the torn pages of books and sheet
music, in those days before Mr. Dennison invented his transparent tape.

Time went by slowly, slowly, as it does when one is young. All day
there was play, except for the occasional stint of patchwork, or the
reading lesson,--every day but Sunday, with its church in the forenoon
and stories and walks in the afternoon. Mamma would say, “When I was
a little girl in Maine,” until to me Maine meant Paradise. In that
country there was a brook where one could wade, and the great river,
on whose banks in the woods children could picnic and hunt for wild
berries,--what a charm in the words, “going berrying!” Even the nest
of angry hornets with their sharp stings did not lessen my enthusiasm.
At San Justo there were no Martha and Susan, no Julia and Ella for me
to play with,--just boys, (who seemed to answer very well for little
tom-boy Sallie when Maine was not in mind).

When I heard of snow and sleighs and sleds and the wonderful attic with
its cunning low curtained windows and the doll colony who lived there,
I forgot the charms of the ranch and the boy play. It was nothing to
me that there were horses and cows, ducks, geese and chickens. It
was nothing to me that Dick and I could make figure-four traps, and,
walking beyond the wool-barn, set them on the hillside for quail; that
once we had the excitement of finding our trap upset, our captives
gone, and great bear tracks all about. The long sunny days of freedom
with the boys, the great herds of sheep that came up for shearing, the
many rides with my father through the lovely valleys and over the hills
were commonplace, just what I had always known. No, life in California
was very tame compared with the imagined joys of Maine.




CHAPTER III DOWN IN MAINE


Twice mamma took me to Maine to see grandmother and grandfather and
Aunt Martha, once when I was two-and-a-half years old and once when
I was nearly five. In each case we stayed about six months so that I
became acquainted with New England in all its varying seasons.

Perhaps it was the being there just when I was forming habits of speech
that has fastened upon me an unmistakable New England way of speaking,
however much the pure dialect may have been corrupted by my usual
western environment.

My aunt tells me that when she first saw me she could think of nothing
so much as a little frisking squirrel, my dark eyes were so shining
and I darted about so constantly. I couldn’t wait after my arrival at
the strange place even long enough to take off hood and coat before
demanding scissors with which to cut paper dolls. When the outer wraps
were removed, the interested relatives saw a slender little girl, with
straight yellow hair, brown eyes and a smooth skin, tanned by wind and
sun.

Evidently there was much excitement attendant upon reaching
grandmother’s, for when I was tucked away for a nap, with a brand new
book purchased the day before in Boston to entertain me until sleep
should come, I occupied myself with tearing every page into pieces the
size of a quarter. I have no suggestion to offer as to why I did it.
When the situation came to adult attention, papa sat down on the trunk
beside the crib and gave me the only spanking he was ever known to
bestow upon his family. The rope was behind the trunk. I saw it while
lying across his knees.

The ill-fated book was not the only purchase made in Boston. Mamma and
I had our pictures taken, and bought clothes for the cold winter ahead.
I had a bottle-green dress and a bottle-green coat to match, also
stockings and bonnet. They put me up on the counter to try the things
on me, and I was glad when mamma chose the velvet bonnet with a white
ruche and little pink roses, for I liked it best of all. Then there
were kid gloves, dark green and white, both of which I hated, because
my poor little fingers buckled when they were put on. When I was taken
to call on the cousins in Beacon Street, I was dressed up in all the
regalia, even to the white gloves. Alas, there was a coping beside the
steps, just the right height for a hand-rail for me, and unfortunately,
dust is black even in Boston. Missy was in disgrace when she reached
the front door. She was better adapted to play in mud pies than formal
calls.

Even if I liked dirt and freedom, I also liked clothes well enough to
remember those I have had, so that now I would venture to reconstruct
a continuous series of them, extending back to babyhood. An early
favorite was of scarlet cashmere, cut in “Gabrielle” style, with
scalloped neck, sleeves and hem, buttonholed with black silk, and on
the front an embroidered bunch of barley, acorns and roses. With this
dress went a little white fur overcoat, cap and muff, all trimmed with
a narrow edge of black fur. So much for clothes. They were ordinarily
buried under aprons.

Maine was a wonderful place! The leaves on the trees were red and
yellow, brown and purple, instead of green, and when the wind blew
they fell off. It left the trees very queer, but the dry leaves on
the ground made a fine swishing noise when one scuffed in them, and
when a little breeze picked them up and sent them scurrying after one
they looked like the rats following the Pied Piper of Hamelin. Mamma
gathered some of the prettiest, pressed them and waxed them with a hot
iron and a paraffine candle. We took them back to San Justo with us and
pinned them on the lace curtains, to remind us of Skowhegan.

Whenever we went to town on an errand or to church, we crossed the
bridge, under which the great river rushed to pour over the falls
below, a never failing wonder. On the far side of the island the water
turned the wheels for cousin Levi Weston’s sawmill, an interesting, if
dangerous, place to visit.

We had not been long in Maine before the air filled with goose
feathers, only it wasn’t feathers, but wet snow. Then came sleds
and sleighs, a snow man and Christmas, with a piggy-back ride on
grandfather to see the tree at the church.

The snow was so deep on the ground and it was so cold, the chickens
had to stay in the barn all the time; every morning grandmother and I
took my little red bucket and went to feed them, out through the summer
kitchen, the wood-shed, past the horse’s stall to their house.

While I was in Maine I learned odors as well as sights. I know the
smell of snow in the air, of pine trees in winter, of a woodshed and
barn, of an old house that has been lived in for long, long years. I
came to know the fragrance of a cellar, apples and butter, vegetables
and preserves, and can recall its clammy coolness.

To have a bath in a wash-tub by the kitchen stove was a lark for a
little wild-westerner who had known only a modern bathroom. The second
time we were at grandfather’s there was a curious soft-rubber pouch
for a tub, which was set up when wanted before the fire in the north
bedroom. The bottom rested on the floor, while the sides were held up
by poles, resting on chairs. After a week-end tubbing, mamma and I
would say together,

  “How pleasant is Saturday night
     When all the week I’ve been good,
   Said never a word that was cross
     And done all the good that I could.”

I have other memories of that fire-place. Once, during the first visit,
mamma left me for a few days in the care of my inexperienced aunt, of
whom I took advantage. I assured her that my mother every night rubbed
my chest with camphorated oil and gave me a spoonful of Hive’s cough
syrup. Evidently I had recently enjoyed a cold. So every night I got
my oil rub and the sweet sticky dose, and, wrapped in an old shawl
and called a “little brown sausage,” was rocked during some blissful
minutes of story-telling. Mamma was shocked when she returned to find
the empty bottle and to know the whereabouts of its contents.

Still another fire-place memory,--papa was taking care of me in this
room, and was having so good a time reading and smoking that I thought
I would do the same. I climbed up and took from the mantel a pretty
twisted paper lamp-lighter, then seated myself beside him, put my feet
as high as I could on my side of the fireplace, adjusted my newspaper,
lighted my cigar, and in mouthing it about, managed to set my front
hair on fire. That attracted papa’s attention to his job.

Soon the time approached for us to be starting west again. Hardly had
we reached Chicago when there was a dangerous fire in the business
section; it was not so long after the great fire that people had
forgotten the terror and panic of it. So we must flee the hotel,
although papa kept saying that if men would tear up the carpets and
wet them and hang them outside the building they might save it. Mamma
dressed me and packed the trunk as fast as she could, and I went out
into the hall and looked down the elevator well, where the door had
been left open. It was the first chance I had ever had to see what a
deep hole it was, but mamma called me to come back, and I thought she
was frightened to see me leaning over and looking down. We went away in
Uncle Jo’s buggy through streets filled with pushing shouting people,
and, as we looked back, all the sky was red with fire. We went to a
small boarding house over by the lake, and all there was in it was a
red balloon, many mosquitoes and a wonderful talking doll that the dear
uncle brought me.

San Francisco came next, a few days at the Grand Hotel, a ride on the
octagonal street car that diagonaled off from Market Street, a visit to
Woodward’s Gardens, and then home by train and stage. It was good after
all to get back to California. Here was our own sitting-room, with its
white marble mantel, its dainty flowered carpet and its lace curtains.
On the wall were colored pictures of Yosemite and a Sunset at Sea, and
engravings of L’Allegro and Il Penseroso, all hanging by crimson cords
with tassels. I liked the dancing girl better, but mamma preferred the
sad one.

I was also glad to get back to my old toys, my book about _Ten Little
Indians_, and the boy cousins who lived at the other end of the house.
And here, soon, came little sister, who was the cunningest baby that
ever was. They rolled her up so close in blankets that Aunt Francina
was afraid she would be smothered. I didn’t want her to be smothered.
What a long time it does take for a baby to grow up enough to play with
a person born three years ahead of her!

Two years later mamma took me and little Anne back again to Maine, for
she had had letters telling her that grandmother was very ill. It was
a harder trip with two children and so my mother planned to simplify
it in every possible way. She invented for us traveling dresses of a
medium brown serge, with bloomers to match, a whole generation before
such dresses came into general favor for little girls. With these,
fewer bags and satchels were necessary, and we looked as well dressed
at the end as at the beginning of the journey; and, moreover, I was
able to stand on my head modestly, whenever I felt like it. I am
glad that I did not have to be mother of restless me on such a long,
confined trip; I am also glad that restless I had a mother who could
cut out such fascinating paper boxes and tell stories and think of
thousands of things to do. Perhaps having two children to take care of
kept mamma from grieving so much about her mother.

I realized little about the illness, because, except for a daily
good-morning call, we children were kept out of the sick room, usually
playing out-of-doors. We rolled down the grassy slope in the south
yard, or drove about in the low basket phaeton along the winding, shady
roads. Sometimes we had a picnic,--I remember especially the one on my
fifth birthday. Georgie Hill, who helped Aunt Martha with the house
work, made a wonderful cake, which contained a button, a thimble, a
penny, and a ring; in some very satisfying way, the section containing
the ring came to me. I had always wanted a ring. I was happy, happy,
and then the very next day I lost it, making mud pies with Annie Allen.
I never had another ring until I was grown up, not even a bracelet,
which might have consoled me. But if I had had either I probably would
have had to suffer the sorrows of separation, since it was my habit to
lose my treasures. My gold pins are sowed up and down the earth; my
sister still has every one she owned. Perhaps it was in recognition of
my capacity to mislay things, and to encourage stoical acceptance of
the situation, that led grandfather to write in my autograph album:

  “My little grand-daughter,
   Just do as you ought to,
   Neither worry nor fret
   At what can’t be mended,
   Nor wait to regret
   Till doing is ended.”

It was on this same birthday that Elizabeth came to me, and her I have
not lost. She was a doll almost as tall as I, that had been made by
my great-grandmother, Deborah Hathaway, for her son’s little girls.
The doll came last to my mother, who was the youngest, and from her
descended to me. Elizabeth had a cloth body, stuffed with cotton, white
kid arms and hands and a papier mache head. She was so unfortunate soon
after her arrival in California, as to suffer a fracture of the skull,
due to contact with a hammer wielded by my small sister. Elizabeth
survived the grafting on of a china head, and is now eighty or more
years old, but looking as young as ever.

I possess many letters written to my father by my mother at this time,
from which I can gain ideas regarding what manner of woman she was, to
supplement my own memory of her whom I lost while still a child.

I seem to have been something of a puzzle to my gentle mother. I quote
from one letter:

“Sarah ... the strangest child I ever saw ... so affectionate, but
will not be coaxed ... super-abundance of spirits.... She tries to
remember all the new rules of life. [I was five years old] ... brown
eyes. I hope those eyes will not hold a shadow caused by her mother
misunderstanding her and crushing out in her by sternness anything
sweet and beautiful. I would not want to love her so fondly as to make
a foolish, conceited woman of her, but I don’t know that that is any
worse than to give her life a gloomy start.”

I love this letter. It delights me that my mother, a high-bred New
England lady, to whom foolishness and frivolity were anathema, should
prefer even them to harshness and a broken spirit for her little
daughter. However, her desire to give my life a happy start was not
incompatible with good discipline. She expected obedience and got it,
sometimes in very ingenious ways. On one occasion when I had been
fretful--“whining” she called it,--she suggested that as I was usually
a good girl and did what she wanted it must be that I was really unable
to improve my voice, that my throat must be rusty and in need of oil to
cure the squeak, so she proceeded to grease the inside of it with olive
oil applied on the end of a stripped white feather. Do you wonder that
it was years before I learned to like French salad dressing, with its
reminder of disordered vocal chords?

In the later summer grandmother died, but as we had seen so little of
her and were kept away from the evidences and symbols of death, it did
not make much impression upon us.

We stayed on in Skowhegan until papa was free to come to Maine for us.
In the meantime both mamma and Aunt Martha visited the Centennial and
their reports of its sights and wonders made me most anxious to go to
Philadelphia, also. When it was proposed that our return trip should
be made by way of that city, in order that my father might visit the
exposition I was delighted, but when he arrived and said he could not,
on account of the state of his business affairs, I received one of the
great disappointments of my life. I shall never forget my unavailing
efforts to persuade them that they ought not to make me miss that
Centennial, since I could not possibly live a hundred years for the
next one.

Soon after we left the old home was sold, and grandfather and Aunt
Martha moved to California, where the rest of us lived. The man who
bought the place cut down the beautiful trees, tore down the house and
built two small ones in its stead. But although the original house is
gone in fact it will live in my mind as long as I do. I could draw its
floor plan; I could set much of its furniture in the correct position.

The arrangement of the dining-room was for years very important for
me, because the only way I could distinguish my right hand from my
left was by seating myself in imagination beside grandfather at table
where I was when I first learned which was which,--left toward him,
right toward cellar door. And, being so seated, I recall another
lesson,--vinegar should not be called beginniger.

It was in the south yard that we built the big snow-man; it was there
that the sleigh upset when we turned in from the street with too much
of a flourish, and pitched Nan and me deep into a snow bank; it was
here under the apple trees that we turned somersaults; it was here that
the horse stood on his hind legs to shake down his favorite apples
from the tree. The same horse would come to the stone door-step by the
kitchen and rattle the bucket there when he was thirsty; that was the
doorstep where I placed my feet when papa made my little shoes shine
like his boots; and here Elizabeth was packed in grandfather Weston’s
old clock-case for her long ride to California,--as if she were going
in a coffin to heaven. But the San Justo heaven lacked the great beds
of lilies-of-the-valley, such as grew under the trees in the Maine yard.

These impressions were planted deep in my mind during the months I
spent in the beautiful village, with its dignified white houses, its
tall trees, its great river. But, once again on my westward way, they
slipped back into the files of memory, displaced by the renewal of
other old impressions, for I was making my fourth trans-continental
trip, my fourth stop in Chicago with my mother’s brother, Josiah
Hathaway.

What fun there was, riding a whole long week in a Pullman car with
its many friendly people, and a new routine of life. In those days
dining-cars, with leisurely meals and dainty service had not been
discovered. There were irregular stops with only twenty minutes for
refreshment, so that a child must depend largely on the luncheon
basket. The bringing of the table and opening the tempting boxes
and packages was a welcome break in the long day. There were tall
green bottles of queen olives, and pans packed with fried chicken,
and all the bread and jam one might eat. We had a can of patent
lemonade,--strange greenish sugar, needing only a few drops from the
little bottle embedded in the powder, and train water to make it into
ambrosia. Such a meal involved soiled hands, but even the washing of
them had a new charm, for mamma took with her to the dressing-room a
bottle of Murray and Lanman’s Florida Water, a few drops of which in
the alkali water made a milky bath fit for the hands of a princess.

When interest within the car failed there was the window, with its ever
new pictures. If there were no houses or people, mountains or clouds to
be seen, there might be a village of prairie dogs, and the rhythm of
passing poles carrying the telegraph wires never failed. I saw cowboys
on their dancing horses, and silent Indians, the women carrying on
their backs little Hiawathas, and offering for sale bows and arrows or
beaded moccasins.

Then night came, and with it the making of magic beds by the smiling
black genie. Once, after I had been deposited behind the green
curtains, we stopped at a way station, where, pressing my nose against
the window pane, I saw by the light of a torch, a great buffalo head
mounted on a pole, and many men moving in and out of the fitful light.

With groans and creakings, with bells and weird whistles we were soon
under way again, and, to the steady song of the wheel, in the swaying
springy bed, I was being whisked over the plains in as many days as
father had once spent in months driving the first sheep to California.

We went back to San Justo and stayed there forever; and then,
when I was almost seven, we went south to the Cerritos for a
never-to-be-forgotten summer with my cousin Harry. When fall came,
instead of returning to the ranch at San Juan we moved to Los Angeles,
a little city, and there I lived until both it and I grew up.




CHAPTER IV FATHER’S STORY


Soon after we settled in Los Angeles I was very sick, due, I fear, to
the hasty swallowing of half-chewed raisins when my foraging expedition
to the pantry was menaced by an approaching mother. She did not know
for several hours about my disobedience of her law against “swiping”
food between meals,--if I were really hungry I would be glad to eat dry
bread without butter or jam,--but the punishment for sin was as sure as
it was in the Sunday school books. I sat for a long, long time screwed
up in a little aching knot in front of the Franklin stove before I was
ready to admit an excruciating pain. I think now-a-days it would have
been called appendicitis.

The doctor took heroic measures: caster oil, tiny black stinking pills,
steaming flannels wrung out of boiling vinegar and applied to my
shrinking abdomen; awful, thick, nasty, white, sweetish cod-liver-oil.
I survived.

I was only seven, and not used to staying in bed for a month at a time,
so papa, sorry for me, day by day, told me the story of his life. He
told me about his home, the brick farm house at Norridgewock on the
Kennebec, the same river that I had seen when I was in Maine.

When he was a little boy there were no matches and no kitchen stoves,
so that his mother had to cook before an open fireplace, and the
clothes for all the family were made at home. His mother spun wool from
their sheep and wove it into cloth and dyed it in the great indigo pot
that stood when she was not using it just inside the shed door. When
they killed a cow for beef they saved the hide, and then in the fall a
traveling shoemaker came to the house and made boots for them, right
there where they could watch him.

When papa was six he secretly learned to milk one of the cows and
then with great joy exhibited his prowess, only to be informed that
thereafter it was to be his daily chore. Another duty that fell to him
about this time was to take care at night of each two year-old whenever
its place in the cradle was taken by a new baby. Somehow the oldest
child in the family, Francina, managed to escape the usual fate of an
oldest daughter, that of secondary mother.

The most wonderful hat that papa ever had was made by cutting down a
white beaver of his father’s--possibly a “Tippecanoe and Tyler too”
campaign hat. Once when it was worn on a berrying expedition he hung it
on the limb of a tree for safe-keeping--and then could never find the
tree and precious hat again, a tragedy of youth.

Papa drew an amusing picture of himself at ten years of age in his
“Sunday-go-to-meeting” clothes. His trousers came half way between
knee and ankle, his jacket was short and round, his collar so high he
could not turn his head, although he could rest his neck during the
long service by using his ears as hooks over the top of the collar. A
stove-pipe hat completed the outfit.

During those evening stories while I was convalescing I learned many
things about the boy’s life in the far-away Maine, of his many cousins,
of his schooling, and why he elected astronomy in place of French at
Bloomfield Academy; of the years when he taught school or worked on a
farm and then of his decision to go to California. He told me of the
sea voyage and the stay in Panama, of San Francisco, and of the life
in Volcano, the little mining town; of the return to Maine and of the
journey west across the plains, driving sheep and cattle. He told me
the story in detail until he reached Salt Lake City, and then one
evening something intervened, I was well again and the absorbing tale
was postponed and then again and again, never to be taken up.

Three years later, Uncle Ben, one of the travelers across the plains,
died; in a few years more father was gone, and I suddenly realized how
little I really knew of the venturesome expedition of the young men. So
I wrote to Dr. Flint, the survivor, asking that he tell me something of
their pioneer experience. He replied that he had kept diaries on both
journeys and that I was welcome to see them at any time. But before the
opportunity came he too had died, I was in the thick of a very busy
life, and his letter was forgotten. Twenty years later I found it and
immediately asked his son to see the journals, but their existence was
not known. A holiday devoted to a search among old papers was rewarded
by the discovery of the valuable documents.

And so, while I cannot recall all the detail of the charming tale
my father told me, I am able, because of these records, to give an
accurate report of how the cousins came to California and brought
across plains, mountains, and deserts to this Pacific Coast some of
the first American sheep, and thus were instrumental in developing an
industry that for many years was of great importance.

It was May 21, 1851, when Amasa and Llewellyn Bixby and Dr. Thomas
Flint left their Maine homes and followed the trail of the gold
seekers. They sailed from New York on the steamer Crescent City, and
met the usual conditions of travel at that period. A retelling of
these facts might become monotonous; the actual experiences of each
traveler were new, and varied according to the personal equipment and
sensibility.

After a week the young men landed at Chagres. They started up the river
on a small stern-wheel steamer, which they occupied for two days and
two nights, during the latter tied up to the bank. At Gorgona they
transferred to a small boat, propelled by the poles of six natives. The
railroad was in course of construction, but not yet ready for use.

All the afternoon of the third day and the entire fourth was spent in
a leisurely tramp over the mountain trail that led down to the Western
port. This walk they enjoyed greatly, observing the strange tropical
land. Several times during the long day they refreshed themselves by
bathing in the clear mountain pools. When from a high point of land
they saw the blue Pacific, they felt like Balboa on his peak in Darian.

While waiting for the S. S. Northerner for San Francisco,--on which
they had passage engaged--a number of days were spent happily,
comfortably, and at reasonable expense in the ancient walled city of
Panama.

The steamer, when it came, proved a very poor means of transportation,
being much over-crowded, dirty, infested with vermin, poorly supplied
with food and leaking so badly that it was necessary to use the pumps
during the entire journey. A stop for a day at Acapulco brought a
welcome change with dinner at a good hotel and an attractive walk into
the country.

They arrived in San Francisco the sixth of July, but made no stop,
going on that afternoon by boat to Sacramento, and from there on to
Volcano Diggings, their objective point. Here they found Benjamin
Flint, a brother of Thomas, who had come out in 1849. Their time from
home was fifty-three days.

Volcano was a characteristic mining town, not far from Sutter’s Mill,
Mokelumne Hill, Hangtown, and other places familiar to all who have
read of those early California days. It was the point on the overland
trail to which Kit Carson was accustomed to conduct emigrants, leaving
them to find their own way from there on to their various destinations.
The wheel marks of the old wagons may still be seen on the limestone
rocks above the town.

After a few months father’s brothers, Marcellus and Jotham, came around
the Horn in a sailing vessel, the Samuel Appleton. Uncle Marcellus
commented in his diary on the monotony of the long trip--“a dull
business going to California on a sail ship.” He spoke of the beauty
of the extreme southern mountains like white marble pyramids, of the
killing of an albatross with a fourteen-foot wing-spread, of the cape
pigeons, “the prettiest birds alive.”

With these brothers came two cousins, making the family group in this
one little settlement about a dozen.

They all of them dabbled more or less in the search for gold, but
gradually turned to agricultural pursuits. Father’s mining days were
limited to one week, employed in driving a mule for gathering up pay
dirt; that satisfied him. He took a job in the local butcher shop at
one hundred and fifty dollars a month, with “keep,” a very important
item in those days of high living cost. He preferred the sureness of
stated wages to the uncertain promise of gold.

Apparently he and the Flints soon purchased the business and continued
to conduct it as long as they remained in Volcano. They were associated
in some way with Messrs. Baker and Stone, of the Buena Vista Ranch,
very fertile mountain meadow land upon which heavy crops of barley were
grown, and cattle were fattened for market.

After a year and a half the three of them, young men between the ages
of twenty-five and thirty, determined to “unite their fortunes for the
undertaking of bringing to California sheep and cattle, more for the
trip than profit.” Consequently, on Christmas Day, 1852, they left for
home, making their way out of the mountains over roads so buried in
snow as to be almost impassable. In Sacramento the river was twelve
miles wide and the streets so full of water that the hack from hotel to
steamer was a flat boat pulled by a horse.

In San Francisco they investigated possible ways of returning to New
York. First cabin was three hundred dollars, “and get across Isthmus
from Panama at your own expense.” The plan adopted was to go steerage
on the S. S. Northerner, the one upon which Dr. Flint and father had
come, then unseaworthy, but now making her first trip after a thorough
overhauling. The fare to Panama was only fifty dollars, which pleased
their thrifty souls, and, as there were few passengers, the third
class accommodations were very comfortable, a great contrast to their
previous experience. They sailed January first.

One of their problems was the safe transfer of their gold to the mint
at Philadelphia. Express charges were so high they decided to avoid
this expense by carrying it with them in buckskin jackets especially
made for that purpose. They soon found the weight, about thirty-five
hundred dollars apiece, too burdensome, so they appropriated a vacant
state-room, put the treasure between two mattresses and set a guard,
one or the other of them remaining in the berth day and night.

Before leaving the steamer at Panama they packed this gold in a large
chest which contained their blankets and clothing, the extra weight
not being sufficient, in so large a container, to arouse suspicion,
as would have been the case if they had attempted to carry it in a
valise, which, Dr. Flint comments, “would have had to be backed with a
revolver.”

On landing they hired a muleteer to carry the precious box while they
followed on foot, taking pains to keep the pack train in sight most of
the time.

They walked as far as Cruces, spending a night on the way. They were
hardly settled comfortably at the Halfway House, when there arrived a
much bedraggled party, westward bound, containing women and children,
whose thin-soled shoes had been little protection on the rough and
muddy trail. I venture a comment that the granddaughters of these women
with light shoes would have been prepared for the exigencies of such
a trip with knickers and hiking boots. Those were days of gallantry,
so our young men surrendered their place of shelter, and moved on in
the rain to a distant shack, where, at first, there seemed no prospect
of food; later, when the owner of the cabin came in, their recently
acquired ability to speak Spanish stood them in good stead, and they
each were favored with a cup of hot stew.

From Cruces they took a small boat down the Chagres River to Barbacoa,
to which point the railroad had been completed. Here there was some
delay incident to the refusal of a negro to accompany his master
further on the return way to Virginia. He had discovered that by
staying on the Isthmus he would escape the slavery that was his. An
attempt was made to take him by force from the garret in which he had
taken refuge, but was given up when the storming party, as they went up
the rickety stairs of the old building, were met by the very deterring
muzzles of big-bore Mexican rifles. The sympathy of the young Maine
men was, naturally, with the negro. The diary comments that it was a
frequent custom for Southerners to take slaves with them to do the
actual work in the California gold fields.

At Aspinwall passage on an independent steamer was found for
twenty-five dollars, making the total fare from San Francisco but
seventy-five dollars, as contrasted with three hundred dollars, the
first cabin rate.

They stopped at Kingston, Jamaica, for coal. “Llewell stayed by
our deposits” while the others went ashore, just as he had done at
Aspinwall. I am interested to learn from these early entries that the
capacity for “staying by” in times of stress was as characteristic of
father in his young days as it was in later years when I knew him.

Twenty-seven days out from San Francisco they reached New York, and,
taking their gold in a valise, set out at once for Philadelphia. They
arrived at night and went to the Hotel Washington, where they took
a room together in order to protect the valuable satchel. The next
morning it was safe in the mint, where everything was assayed, fifty
dollar slugs, coins from private mints of San Francisco, and native
gold.

Of the experience in Philadelphia, Dr. Flint writes: “January 29:
Got our mint receipts of the value of our deposits. We were dressed a
little rough when we arrived, and at the hotel were seated at the most
inconvenient table. But as we dressed up somewhat and the report of our
gold got more known we were moved pretty well up in the dining room
before we left.”

The next day they went on to Boston where they stopped at the United
States Hotel, a hotel to which my father took me nearly forty years
later, when he escorted me east to enter Wellesley College.

The evening of February first they reached their home, just a month
from San Francisco. The journey west two years before had taken nearly
twice as long.

Since they were among the first to return from the gold fields, they
were objects of great interest to all the neighbors round about. They
had scores of visitors, all eager for news of their own men-folk in
far away California, the land so vaguely known, its great distances so
under-estimated. They assumed that the returned travelers might know
everyone in the new state.

They visited at home for five weeks. “We talked,” says Dr. Flint,
“until our vocal chords could stand the strain no longer and were glad
to start west.”




CHAPTER V DRIVING SHEEP ACROSS THE PLAINS


On March 8, 1852, the cousins began the long return journey by rail,
horseback, emigrant wagon and foot that ended just ten months later
at San Gabriel, in Southern California. Dr. Flint, at the end of his
diary, sums up the distances as follows:

“Today closes the year 1853, and one year from the time we left San
Francisco on the steamship Northerner; in which time we have traveled
by steamship 5,344 miles. By railroad 2,144 miles. I have, by steamboat
on Mississippi and Missouri Rivers, 1,074 miles. On horseback and on
foot 2,131 miles, making a total of 10,693 on a direct line between
points reached.”

This diary is said to have especial historical value because the author
put down daily specific facts of cost, distance and conditions of
travel. Many accounts of the overland trip are but memories.

As I have read the journal I have been impressed with the idea that
while it took vision, health and character on the part of the young
pioneers to accomplish their object, the burdens came only day by day
and would not be refused by the vigorous young grandsons whom I know
now, were the same rewards offered for enterprise and endurance.

The railroad journey from Boston to Terre Haute, the western terminus
of the road, was a very different one from that of today, taking then a
week instead of a few hours.

They went down from Anson and Norridgewock to Boston where they
exchanged their “money at Suffolk Bank for their bills, as they were
good anywhere West, and none others were.”

Leaving Boston at 8 A.M., an all day ride took them to Albany, where
they spent the night at the Delavan House. They went on early the
next morning to Buffalo, which was reached at 11 P.M. Here they “put
up at the Clarendon House. Tired. Sleepy.” At eleven in the forenoon
they left for Cincinnati, reaching Cleveland at 8 P.M., Columbus at 4
A.M., where they changed cars, and arrived at their destination late
at night, after a thirty-six hour ride in day coaches. They rested at
Cincinnati until the next afternoon, when they went over to Dayton
for the purpose of making an early start on the last lap of the
railroading. The entry for March 16 reads:

“Called at 2 o’clock A.M., went aboard cars at 2-1/2. No breakfast,
nor could we get a mouthful until we arrived in Indianapolis, at 2-1/2
o’clock P.M. The R. R. was new, rough and no stations by the way.
Arrived in Terre Haute about 5 P.M.”

Here they stopped for a week at the Prairie House. They organized their
firm of Flint, Bixby & Co., in which Benjamin, who had been longer in
California, had four parts to three each for the others. They wrote
letters, bought three horses, fitted saddles to them, and, on March
19th, started west for Paris, Illinois, over “roads as bad as mud can
make them.”

They went across the state, a few miles a day, calling occasionally on
an old friend or on one of their many cousins who had settled in the
Middle West. Once they stopped over night in Urbana at the Middlesex
House, where they found six beds in a 6 x 9 room, and had for breakfast
“fried eggs swimming in lard, the almost universal food in this part of
the world.”

By April first they had arrived in Quincy. “Had a hard time finding the
town,” says Dr. Flint. “Most of the way through oak-wooded prairie,
uncultivated.... Horseback distance from Terre Haute, 348 miles.”

Quincy was their headquarters while they were seeking and buying sheep,
finding a few at one place, a few at another. Father once told me of
the vexations they had at first, trying to drive in one homogeneous
band all these little groups of sheep, each with its own bell wether.

During the last of April and the first of May, while still buying
stock, they sheared their sheep at Warsaw, Illinois, selling the wool,
6,410 pounds, for $1,570.45 to Connable-Smith Co., of Keokuk, Iowa. At
this time it is recorded that father received a remittance of $1,000.00
from a California acquaintance, undoubtedly a welcome addition to their
funds with such an undertaking ahead of them. They must have had their
trip well planned before they left Volcano, for Pacific Coast mail to
meet them thus.

On May 7 they started off for the overland journey with 1,880 sheep,
young and old, eleven yoke of oxen, two cows, four horses, two wagons,
complete camping outfit; four men, three dogs, and themselves. They
ferried across the Mississippi River at Keokuk for $62.00.

At some time during the trip the number of sheep was increased for I
have always heard it said that the flock contained 2,400, and I have a
later brief resume of the trip, made by Dr. Flint, in which he mentions
the larger number.

There was much travel across the plains at this time. The entry for May
8 is: “In Keokuk. Visited the Mormon camp where it was said there were
3,400 proselytes from Europe, 278 emigrant wagons ready to convey them
to Salt-Lake. A motley crowd of English, Welsh, Danes, etc.”

Father and Ben went on across Iowa with their train, while Dr. Flint
went alone by steamer to St. Louis to purchase further supplies, which
he took up the Missouri on the S. S. El Paso to meet his partners at
Council Bluffs.

It is interesting to note that while he was in St. Louis he heard Prof.
Agassiz lecture on geology. St. Louis was a far Cry from Cambridge, but
in this golden age of American lectures men took long and hard trips to
carry knowledge to eager learners. How fortunate that Mr. Bryan had not
yet arisen to combat the spread of scientific thinking!

The trip up the river from St. Louis to Council Bluffs took ten
days, due in part to the many stops for loading and unloading, and
to the necessity for tying up at night because of changing currents
and shifting banks. There is mention of frontier settlements, of
Indians along shore and of the varied passengers, among them a group
of fourteen Baptist ministers, going to attend a convention. Their
presence brought about the curious anomaly of “prayer meeting at one
end of the saloon, cards at the other.” By Sunday, the 29th, the
preachers had disembarked, and the steamer was “getting above moral and
religious influences as we leave civilization behind and touch the wild
and woolly west.”

The steamer arrived at Kanesville (Council Bluffs) on May 30, where
the supplies were landed during a severe storm. The place was a “town
of huts, and full of sharp dealers who live off the emigrants ... the
outpost of the white man.”

Here Dr. Flint met Ben and Lewell with their sheep and wagons, but the
crossing of the river was delayed for a week by the heavy rains.

After a final gathering of supplies, the purchase of an additional
saddle horse and another wagon, the stock was ferried across the
Missouri River and they found themselves “fairly on the plains.”

The personnel of the party varied from time to time. Dr. Flint says
there were fifteen men, but does not name them all. Three men, after a
couple of weeks, became faint-hearted and turned back. The teamsters,
Jennings, who served also as butcher, White, the carpenter, and John
Trost, the “Dutchman,” appear to have made the entire trip with them.

There is frequent mention of William C. Johnson, who, with his bride
Mary, left the party with whom they had been traveling and added their
wagon to ours. Mrs. Johnson, the only woman in the train, contributed
to the general comfort by baking bread for them all, and on gala days
making apple pie or doughnuts.

This comparatively small group of men and wagons, with much stock, made
conditions somewhat different from those recently pictured in the “The
Covered Wagon,” and yet this film has made real to many the hazards and
fatigue, the courage and the heartbreak, the manner of life and travel
that were common to all who crossed the plains.

The route chosen by my people differed from that picture in that it lay
altogether north of the Platte River, but they encountered many lesser
streams across which their stock must swim.

From the first of June until the middle of July they were on the
prairies; from then on they were in the Rocky Mountains until the first
of September, when they came down into the Valley of the Great Salt
Lake. By the first of October they were well under way again, following
the Fremont Trail to San Bernardino, a journey of three months. I have
given a brief report of their route; the diary is full of interesting
details of daily happenings, of the type of country through which they
passed, of the things that grew by the wayside and of the various
animals they encountered. Comments on the landscape give a hint of the
love of beauty in the writer, but, being a New Englander, he does not
indulge in much emotional or florid language.

I was interested in several mentions of the guidebook, Horne’s, which
evidently mapped out the routes with more or less detail. Sometimes
they found the statements accurate, sometimes not.

The sending of a letter home from time to time makes one realize that
the trail, though long and hard, was a traveled one, and that they were
not entirely isolated. Occasionally they were overtaken and passed by
those who could go more rapidly, unhampered by the slow-moving sheep.
Father often said that he walked across the continent; he had a saddle
horse, Nig, but, going at a sheep’s pace, he found it pleasanter on
foot.

When they first started out from Council Bluffs they met reports that
Indians ahead were troublesome, but they did not encounter any for
nearly a month. Then one day a couple of Omahas, carrying an English
rifle, were in camp for a time. Two nights later the man on guard,
James Force, was shot dead by an Indian who was attempting to capture
Dr. Flint’s horse. Father told me it was his watch, but this man had
taken it that fatal night, in return for some favor father had shown
him.

The last of July they had a second meeting with Indians, but
fortunately without casualties on either side. Dr. Flint says: “Soon
after halting, an half dozen Indians bounded out of the brush and
commenced to pillage the wagons. The teamsters, Johnson, Palmer, and
Jennings, were scared out of their wits and offered no resistance,
but Mrs. Johnson went after their hands with a hatchet when they went
to help themselves to things in her wagon.... Two more Indians joined
those already present,--one of them with a certificate that they were
Good Indians. It was written in faultless penmanship, expressing the
hope we would treat them well, so we gave them some hard tack and a
sheep that was lame.... The Indians were greatly astonished when they
found that we could use the Spanish language. We found that they were a
hunting and marauding party of Arapahoes from Texas.”

Shortly after this our party overtook a desolate train of
Mormons,--mostly women and children from England,--who had been robbed
of all their provisions by these “Good Indians,” and who would have
perished but for the timely arrival of our people, who supplied them
with sufficient food to carry them through to their destination.

By the middle of August the company crossed South Pass and “drank from
Pacific Springs.” They went past Fort Bridger, where they left the
Oregon Trail and turned southward through the mountains into Utah. As
they were going down the last defiles into the broad valley they were
met by watchers who enquired if they were saints or sinners. When it
was known that they were the people who were the saviors of the robbed
and stranded Mormons, they were given a royal welcome by Brigham Young
and his saints. Their flocks were turned into the Church pastures, and
they were given free access to the gardens. After long months of camp
fare they enjoyed greatly the plenty of this promised land, the green
corn, squashes, potatoes and melons.

It had been their intent to drive their stock directly across Nevada
and the Sierras into Central California, their destination, but the
season was so late they feared the heavy snows that were imminent in
the high mountains. They therefore determined to travel southwest into
Southern California and from there to drive up the coast.

After about three weeks of rest and recuperation, they set out, with
flocks augmented by purchase from the Mormons, upon the hardest portion
of the trail.

From this time on there is frequent mention of other parties engaged
in similar enterprise. A number of these joined forces for mutual
protection against the Indians, who were very troublesome in the
Southwest. They attempted to stampede the horses and cattle, which were
easily frightened. The sheep were not so hard to protect, for they when
alarmed huddled closer to the camp fire.

Although the men were constantly annoyed by the attempts of the Indians
to run off stock, they managed to avoid actual conflict and no lives
were lost.

When the Indians did succeed in cutting out some of the stock they
would return it, on being paid at the rate of two “hickory” shirts
(the khaki of that day) for a cow, and one for a calf. On one occasion
the Indians brought in venison for sale, which was bought and eaten,
before it was discovered that the number of “deer” corresponded exactly
with the number of colts that were missing.

Anyone who has made the rail trip between Salt Lake City and Los
Angeles can appreciate the references made in the diary to the rough
and stony trails, the dust, the days without water or food for the
animals, to sage-brush and cactus, and can but wonder how it was
possible to get flocks across the desert country at all.

On the earlier part of this trail, where there was still some
noticeable vegetation, they lost many sheep through the eating of
poison weeds. They lost others through the drinking of poor water or
the entire lack of it for many weary miles.

At one place they had trouble with quicksands, at another the sheep
balked at crossing the Rio Virgin and father and two helpers spent a
whole afternoon packing on their backs one sheep at a time across a
hundred-foot ford.

On the fifth of December, the Flint-Bixby train and the Hollister
train started together on the hardest portion of the whole trip--about
a hundred miles without water, except for the meager Bitter Water
Springs. Most of the wagons and the cattle went on ahead, and, after
three days, reached the springs, where they waited for the other men
with the sheep. On the fourth day the first of the Hollister sheep
came in; on the fifth, in the morning, came Ben and father, and in
the afternoon Hub Hollister. Dr. Flint mentions the oxen as being
“famished for want of food and particularly for water, a sad sight
of brute suffering.” With the arrival of the sheep, the cattle again
went on to the Mojave River. The sheep did not arrive until the
fourteenth, after eleven days spent in crossing the desert. The diary
tells something of the trouble experienced. Dr. Flint says: “I packed
my horse with provisions and started back to meet Ben and Lewell with
the sheep. Met them some six miles out. They had used up all their
water and food, hence it was a relief to them when I hove in sight.
Some of the men had such a dread of the desert that they were beside
themselves, imagining they would parish from thirst before getting over
the forty miles.” It appears from this that the prime movers in the
enterprise must not only be brave and fearless themselves, but must
also provide courage for their helpers.

It was this stretch of desert that caused the greatest loss to men who
imported sheep in this manner. Just how many of ours died, or had to
be abandoned, I have never heard, but my father told me that they were
fortunate in losing fewer than the average.

After reaching the Mojave River they all rested for several days, “the
men loafing about the camps or pitching horse shoes.” Evidently this
favorite masculine sport did not defer its entry into California until
the arrival of the Iowa contingent.

Conditions at last were better. They camped on dry burr clover instead
of sand and stones and “had a big fire of cottonwood, which gave a
cosy look to the camp.” They had a stew of wild ducks and got “a mess
of quail for Christmas dinner on the morrow.”

On the 29th they “moved on towards the summit of the Sierras. Warm and
pleasant. Green grass in places two inches high. Snow clad mountains on
our right.”

On Friday the 30th they crossed the mountains through Cajon Pass, and
on New Years Day, the scribe to whom we are indebted for the detailed
account of this long, long journey was the guest of the Hollisters
at San Bernardino for dinner. Father told me they celebrated by
having doughnuts. It is evident that the two trains came in together,
sometimes one ahead, sometimes the other. I make note of the fact of
their traveling in company because I have seen it stated in print that
Col. Hollister was the first to bring American sheep to California. I
am pleased to be able to offer this contemporary witness to the fact
that there are others to share the honor. Mention is made of the sheep
of Frazer, White and Viles, and McClanahan as well as of Col. Hollister
and Flint, Bixby & Co., all of whom shared the hardships of the trail
those last days of 1853.

The San Bernardino into which they came after their long trip across
the desert was a Mormon colony which had been founded three years
earlier.

After spending the New Year at San Bernardino the herds that we have
followed across the plains moved on to the “Coco Mongo” ranch and
vineyard.

This was apparently a current spelling as it occurs in official
government documents. It is a word of Indian origin meaning a sandy
place. The first grape vines which still surprise the passer-by with
their growth in seemingly pure sand had been planted some ten years
before this. The old winery stands just north of the Foothill Boulevard
between Upland and Cucamonga.

The next drive took the men and sheep across the valley to the Williams
Ranch, the Santa Ana del Chino, and after a night there they moved on
to San Gabriel, which they reached the evening of January seventh.
The entry of the journal for January ninth would indicate that new
comers seventy years ago were as impressed by orange trees, as are the
tourists of today:--“A beautiful scene at sunrise. There had been a
light flurry of snow during the night which stuck to the orange leaves
and to the fruit, which, when lighted by the clear morning sun made a
most beautiful contrast of colors tropical and arctic.”

On that date they moved over to the ranges of the Rancho San Pasqual
where they had been able to rent pasturage. This is the site of the
present city of Pasadena. Here they camped for the remainder of the
winter.

“The only incident out of the ordinary routine of camp life for two
months,” says Dr. Flint, “was the birth of a son to Mr. and Mrs.
Johnson.”

In the spring they moved northward, through Ventura and Santa Barbara;
thence through the mountains to Paso Robles and San Luis Obispo, again
over the high hills and onward until they came to San Jose, where they
rented the Rancho Santa Teresa and pastured their sheep for fourteen
months. They sheared and sold their wool to Moore and Folger, familiar
names in those old days. They sold wethers for mutton at $16 a head and
bought a thousand sheep at $5.00. Then in the summer of 1855 they moved
to Monterey county in search of feed, and, in October, bought from
Francisco Perez Pacheco the Rancho San Justo, half of which they soon
sold to their friend Col. Hollister. It is on this latter portion that
the city of Hollister now stands.

[Illustration: RANCHO SAN JUSTO]




CHAPTER VI RANCHO SAN JUSTO


With the purchase of the first land, the Rancho San Justo, Flint, Bixby
& Co., were definitely located, and for forty years San Juan Bautista
was their headquarters. After father’s death the firm was dissolved and
the properties separated, the Flints retaining the lands in the north
and the Bixby heirs those in Southern California.

As time went on the flocks increased beyond the capacity of the
original ranch to support them, and since the wool business was
profitable, other land was bought. As a little girl at San Justo I used
to hear my father tell of necessary trips over to the “Worry-Worry”
ranch. In later years I discovered that he was speaking of the
Huero-Huero. Another of the ranches in Central California was the San
Joaquin.

In 1866 the firm bought in Los Angeles county the Ranchos Los Cerritos,
and a little later took a part interest in the adjoining Los Alamitos.
They held a half interest in the western part of the Palos Verdes,
the seventeen thousand acres, which since its sale has figured so
prominently in real estate literature. Flint, Bixby & Co. were also
half owners of the great San Joaquin Ranch in Orange Co. with James
Irvine, to whom they sold their interest in the late seventies. They
owned these great tracts of land when there were so few people in
Southern California, that it was possible to utilize them for grazing
purposes. When settlers came in the lands were sold in comparatively
large parcels to men who had sufficient capital to subdivide and retail
them as small farms or town lots.

Flint, Bixby & Co. were primarily stock raisers, but they branched out
into a number of other lines.

Beginning in 1869 they operated the Coast Line Stage Co., which carried
passengers, Wells Fargo express and mails between San Francisco, Los
Angeles and San Diego, until 1877, when the Southern Pacific completed
a line between the first two cities. The stage time between San
Francisco and Los Angeles was sixty-six hours.

The making of beet sugar interested them and they, with others,
organized and built at Alvarado, Alameda Co., the first successful
sugar factory not only in California but in the United States. The
initial run was in 1870. Flint, Bixby & Co. transferred their interest
to a second factory in Soquel, Santa Cruz Co. This new industry
suffered from drought, insect pests, price cutting by competing cane
sugar interests and the fact that at that time the process of making
sugar from beets had not been developed to the point it now is, and
the product was not popular. In 1880 the Soquel factory was closed.
Father, however, retained a belief in the ultimate practicability of
sugar-making in California, and his last business undertaking was an
attempt to re-establish it on the Cerritos, near Long Beach. It was
in 1896, the year of the free-silver agitation, and he was unable to
finance a sugar factory himself, but he induced the Clark interests to
put one up on adjoining territory at Los Alamitos, thus obtaining a
market for future beet crops.

It is hard now-a-days to visualize conditions in California during
the fifties outside of San Francisco or the mining camps. The vast
stretches of open valley and hill land were practically uninhabited,
and were infested with wild beasts, and sometimes, wilder men. A very
vivid impression of this may be obtained by anyone fortunate enough to
read an account of “A Dangerous Journey From San Francisco to San Luis
Obispo” given by J. Ross Browne in his book called _Crusoe’s Island_.
We spent one of his nights in the old inn at San Juan, where the young
Maine stockmen were so soon to settle.

The venture of bringing the sheep across the plains having proved good
and a wide estate having been acquired the young men turned their
thoughts to home-building, which is in a primary way, state building.
Not content with the women the west at that time afforded, each in his
turn, like Jacob of old, made a pilgrimage back to the land from which
he came in search of a wife of his own people; but, unlike the old
patriarch, it did not take long to find the bride willing to return to
that far-off, glamorous California. Benjamin Flint’s wife was Caroline
Getchell and Dr. Flint’s was Mary Mitchell, both girls from their home
town of Anson. Father married Sarah Hathaway of Bloomfield, now a part
of Skowhegan.

The way of it was this. Soon after his return to Norridgewock, he,
with many others, was a guest at the annual church party at the home
of Mr. Hathaway, the minister of the parish at Bloomfield. He had been
told that he would find “a passel” of pretty girls there, and was
advised that Margaret, the second, was especially beautiful. That was
a fateful party! Out of it came the destiny of all the five daughters,
for four of them married Bixbys and the fifth became foster mother to
three of us children.

It was not the recommended, witty, black-eyed Margaret, however, who
won the love of Llewellyn, but the oldest girl, tall, blue-eyed Sarah,
whose name I bear. She captured his heart, and soon left Maine to go
with him the long way, by Panama, to the distant ranch of San Juan.

What more natural than when, after a time, brother Jotham returned to
his home, he should go over to the neighboring parsonage to bear the
greetings of his sister-in-law, Sarah, to her family? It is told that,
when upon this errand he met at the gate the lovely Margaret, he lost
his heart completely. He never regained it. When he was eighty he told
me emphatically that his wife not only had been the most beautiful
woman in California, but that she still was.

A few months after this meeting Margaret traveled with friends across
the Isthmus, and up the coast to San Francisco, there to be met by
her sister and taken to San Justo to await her marriage day, which
came shortly. She was married in her new home in old San Juan by the
minister, Dr. Edwards, who had recently been a missionary among the
Choctaw Indians. A letter describing the ceremony tells of the usual
preparations, the making of bride’s cake and wedding cake, of putting
the finishing touches on the little house, of the arranging of the
wedding veil and the gathering in the early evening of the group of
friends and relatives, including three little folks that had already
come into the different families.

The home began immediately, and a few days later a call at the house
discovered the bride happy in her house work and doing the first family
washing.

This wedding ceremony was the first that Dr. Edwards had ever performed
for white people, but it is reported to have been so well done that no
one would have guessed inexperience. It is to be hoped that his later
services in this line were as successful as this one. He was still the
minister in San Juan when I was a child and he was wont to entertain me
by repeating the Lord’s prayer in Choctaw.

The same letter which reports the marriage speaks of the new ranch
house that was building and of the hope that it would be ready for
occupancy in about two months, which dates the building for me,--early
in 1863.

Each of the cousins when he married had brought his wife back to the
San Justo, where they occupied in common a comparatively small house,
which in my childhood was used for the hired men. But children were
coming and a larger home was necessary. The men were intimate and
congenial, and dreamed of an enlargement and continuation of their
associated lives; the income was ample so they proceeded to build them
a great house, a communal house, a staunch Maine house, white-painted
and green-shuttered, as solid and true today as sixty years ago,--but,
alas, now idle. This was the house in which I was born.

They planted the garden about it and the orchard, and made below it the
pond where the hills could look to see if their trees were on straight.
In winter time those hills were as green as any of Maine in June, but
in our rainless summer they were soft tan or gold against the cobalt
sky.

To accommodate three families there were three apartments, each
with sitting-room, bedroom and bath, and in addition, for the use
of the whole group, a common parlor, large office, dining room and
kitchen, together with numerous guest rooms in the upper story.
Every convenience of the period was included,--ample closets, modern
plumbing, sufficient fire-places.

The plan for housekeeping in this large establishment was for each
wife in turn to take charge for a month. It was no small undertaking
to provide for the household, with the growing flocks of children and
the frequent addition of visiting sisters, cousins, or aunts. The
women involved, being individuals, had differing capacities and ideas,
and each had the desire for a home managed according to her own idea.
Imagine sitting down to every meal with six parents, twelve children
and half a dozen guests! Inevitably the communal plan could not but
fail to be altogether ideal. For a wonder it held together in a fashion
for fifteen years, but there were many trips to San Francisco to
relieve the strain, or long visits of mothers and children in Maine,
that I guess might not have been so frequent or of so long duration if
there had been individual homes for the cousin-partners. Ultimately the
Ben Flints took up a permanent residence in Oakland and we moved to Los
Angeles, leaving the Dr. Flints on the ranch.




CHAPTER VII LOS ALAMITOS AND LOS CERRITOS


For many reasons our choice of Los Angeles as a residence was a very
happy one. In the first place it gave my father an opportunity to keep
in touch with his business interests in the southern part of the state,
and in the second it fulfilled two dear wishes of my mother.

It had been her desire, for years, to get away from the large ranch
house at San Justo, with its crowds of people, and into a small home
of her own where she could surround her children with influences and
conditions that accorded with her ideals.

Again, it was joy to her to be near her two sisters, who lived on the
neighboring ranches, Los Cerritos and Los Alamitos, and to her father
who had recently come to Southern California.

[Illustration: RANCHO LOS ALAMITOS]

The three families were doubly related,--Hathaway mothers and Bixby
fathers, Mary and Llewellyn, Margaret and Jotham, Susan and John. I
have told of my father’s marriage to Sarah Hathaway. She was always
a delicate girl and lived only six years after she came west as a
bride. There were no children, much to the disappointment of them both.
After an interval of six years father returned to Maine and married my
mother, Mary, the little sister of his loved Sarah, who had, in the
twelve years passed, grown to womanhood. When I came I was given the
name of this beloved older sister and wife.

Before this time Jotham Bixby and his family had moved from San Juan
to the Cerritos ranch, bringing with them for company at the isolated
home, his wife’s sister, Susan, who, in the course of time married
the young cousin, John W. Bixby, newly come from Maine. They fell in
love and became engaged and kept their secret right under the noses
of interested friends and relatives who were planning all sorts of
matrimonial alliances except the one that was planning itself--one
destined to exceptional happiness.

When they married they left the Cerritos and lived in Wilmington, where
they remained for several years. They moved their home to the Alamitos
about the time that we came south to settle in Los Angeles.

The intimate connection of double blood-kinship and of business
association made the three families seem like one and us children like
brothers and sisters.

Our home in Los Angeles became the headquarters for the out-of-town
relatives, and several times a week we had some of them for luncheon
guests. On the other hand we of the town grasped every chance to spend
a day, a week, or the long summer vacation at one of the adobes. All
the festival days were shared. Cerritos claimed the Fourth of July
most often, for its bare court yard offered a spot free from fire
hazard. What a satisfying supply of fire-works our combined resources
offered! There were torpedoes, safe for babies, fire-crackers of
all sizes, double-headed Dutchmen, Chinese bombs,--to make the day
glorious,--and, for the exciting evening (one of the two yearly
occasions when I was permitted to stay up beyond bed-time) there were
pinwheels that flung out beauty from the top of the hitching post,
there were dozens of roman candles with their streams of enveloping
fire, and luscious shooting stars, and sky-rockets that rose
majestically with a disdainful shriek as they spurned the earth and
took a golden road to the sky.

Inter-family feasting at the three homes in turn marked Thanksgiving,
Christmas and New Years Day. It was the laden tree on Christmas Eve
that offered the second annual escape from early bed-time rules, in
itself enough to key one up to ecstacy, without the added intense joy
of mysterious expectation and satisfied possession of the largesse
of Santa Claus. A Christmas celebration at Cerritos when I was four
stands out distinctly in my memory,--a tall, tall tree, as much as
twenty feet high, judged by present standards, stood in the upper
chamber whose ceiling, unlifted by an excited imagination, is about
eight feet. From that tree came Isabel, my most beloved doll, a small
bottle of Hoyt’s German Cologne,--how I delighted in perfume,--a small
iron stove. The latter was put to a use not contemplated by the patron
saint, for I am sure he did not want me to spend the whole of the
following morning in duress vile in my bed, because of that stove. This
is what happened. After breakfast my almost-twin cousin Harry and I,
while our mothers chatted at table, re-visited the scene of the past
evening’s festivities and wished to bring back some of the joy of it.
Drawn curtains gave semi-darkness, candles stolen from the closet under
the stairs and placed lighted in the wide window-sills gave a subdued
light, and many little stubs of the gay Christmas tapers from the tree
made a wonderful illumination under the bed and in the tent made by the
turned-back bed clothes.

But it was the escaping fire from the paper-stuffed toy stove which
stood on the sheet about the foot of the tree that made us decide to
hear the clamoring for admittance of the suspicious mothers,--we had
sense enough to summon help when conditions arose with which we were
unable to cope. But Harry was cannier than I, for he sent me to open
the door where the worried women stood, while he escaped from the far
end, going down a ladder from the flat roof of the wing to the tall
weeds beyond the huge wood-pile. I was apprehended and punished. He
wasn’t, not being subject to the same administration of discipline as
was I. Then it was that I learned that justice does not always prevail
in this world.

This Christmas visit affords my earliest memories of Cerritos, although
I know I had been there several times before. It was the long blissful
summer when I was seven that packed my mind with vivid pictures and
remembrance of joyful activity. Is not seven a peak in childhood,--old
enough for self direction, young enough for thrills?

After this visit was over and we departed for nearby Los Angeles to
make ourselves a new home my life went on in parallel lines, school
days in town, vacation days at the ranches. I should tell of them both
at the same time to be truly realistic, but the exigencies of narration
make it seem better to write of the two experiences as if they were
separate. So first, the ranches.

I have told at length of my birthplace, the San Justo. Although it,
as well as the southern ranches, was devoted to sheep raising, there
were many differences between them. The houses and gardens at San Justo
were of New England type, built and developed according to the early
associations of the young men. At the other ranches the homes were of
adobe, old ones, handed down from an earlier period.

The locations and surrounding country also differed greatly. In the
north the house stood in a valley between wooded hills, with no wide
outlook. The southern houses were each placed on the brow of a mesa,
with a view across a characteristic California river which might be a
dangerous torrent or a strip of dry sand, according to the season of
the year. The eyes could follow across flat lands, treeless, except for
a few low-growing willows, to far, blue, mysterious mountains. It was
a very empty land, empty of people and towns, of trees and cultivated
lands.

The people on the northern ranch were but two miles from a village,
with friends, a post office and a church, and San Francisco, a real
city, not far away nor hard to reach. When Aunt Margaret came to Los
Cerritos there was not a railroad nor a street car within five hundred
miles, and Los Angeles, the small village, was sixteen miles away--by
horse power, not gasoline or electricity.

However, distance did not prevent the making of good friends, and the
isolation of the frontier life was broken by an occasional visit to San
Francisco, one or two trips to distant Maine (Aunt Margaret traveled
East on the first through sleeper to go over the new railroad), and by
the coming of visitors from neighboring ranches or from away.

On one occasion the ranch welcomed for a week the officers of the
flag-ship, Pensacola, anchored at San Pedro, including Admiral
Thatcher, an old friend of the family, who was in command of the
Pacific squadron.

Often there was unexpected company in this land of great distances and
few inns. Even after my day wayfarers used occasionally to drop in, so
that it was necessary to be prepared to double a meal on short notice.
Liebig’s Extract of Beef many a time counteracted in soup the weakening
effect of quantity-extending water. Locked up in a large tin box a
ripening fruit cake awaited an emergency call for dessert, and there
was always an unlimited supply of mutton and chickens.

The young people did not have time to be lonely. Uncle Jotham was
engaged in building up a large sheep business and Aunt Margaret had her
sister for company; she had her children and sufficient help so that
she did not suffer any of the hardships that are usually associated
with pioneer life. I have observed that if a woman is occupied with
a young family, and of a reasonably contented disposition it makes no
great difference whether the people outside her home are near or far,
few or many;--there are books for spare minutes.

It may be of interest to some to know how we happened to come into
Southern California, and something of the history of the ranches,
Los Cerritos, “The Little Hills,” and Los Alamitos, “The Little
Cottonwoods”--beautiful, lilting Spanish names, either one of which
would have been preferable to the name chosen by those who bought of
the ranch lands and promoted the seaside town of Long Beach. I am glad
that we are free of responsibility for the choice of that prosaic name,
or for the dubbing of Cerritos Hill, Signal, because of the presence on
its top of a tripod used as a marker by surveyors.

When my father sailed up the western coast on the Fourth of July,
1851, the old S. S. Northerner, unseaworthy, hugged the coast, nearly
wrecking herself by the way, on the rocks at Point Firmin; he, from
his place on the deck looked across the mesa to Cerritos Hill, and
watched the vaqueros at work with cattle, and like many a later comer,
was captivated by the country and determined, if possible, sometime
to possess a portion of that land. The time came in 1866, when Flint,
Bixby & Co. bought from Don Juan Temple the Rancho Los Cerritos,
paying him for it in San Francisco twenty thousand dollars in gold,
or about seventy-five cents an acre for the twenty-seven thousand
acres, without allowing anything for the fine adobe hacienda with its
Italian garden. The reason that this was possible was that the owner
was growing old and anxious to settle his affairs so that he might go
with his family to spend the remainder of his life in Paris. Moreover,
business conditions in Southern California were bad at the time, owing
not only to the war depression of the country in general, but also to
the disastrous drouth during the years ’62-’63 and ’63-’64, during
which practically no rain fell. The raising of cattle had been up
to this time the chief industry, but with the failure of vegetation
thousands of them starved to death. It is told that it became necessary
for the citizens of Anaheim, where their fine irrigation system kept
their colony green, to use their surrounding willow hedge as a defense
and post men to fight off the inrush of the famished cattle. It was the
wiping out of this industry that brought about the sale of many of the
large holdings of land in Southern California and was the beginning of
the development of varied industries and the opening of the land for
settlement.

The lands which came into the possession of our family about this time
were those of Don Abel Stearns and Don Juan Temple, who were both heavy
losers as the result of the drouth.

Both these men came to Los Angeles from Boston before 1830 and were
among the first Americans to settle in the pueblo. They married native
Californians and adapted themselves to the life of the community they
had chosen for their home, and their names occur frequently in all
accounts of early Los Angeles affairs.

They both owned city property. Stearns’s home, El Palacio, was on the
site of the Baker Block, near the plaza. In 1859 he built at the rear,
facing Los Angeles Street and looking down Aliso the Arcadia Block,
named for his wife Arcadia de Bandini. For this building he used bricks
from the first local kiln. In order to complete it he borrowed twenty
thousand dollars from Michael Reese on a mortgage on the Rancho Los
Alamitos, and because of his great losses of cattle during the great
drouth of the sixties he was unable to repay the loan and so lost the
ranch.

John Temple’s general merchandise store stood where the post office
does today. In 1859, the same year that marked the building of the
Arcadia Block, he built at a cost of forty thousand dollars and
delivered to the city a market house surmounted by a town clock with
a bell “fine toned and sonorous.” This was the court house of my
childhood and its clock ordered our days. It stood where the new Los
Angeles City Hall is now rising. He, with his brother, F. P. A. Temple
built the fine block that marked the northern junction of Spring and
Main Streets and has stood until this day of rerouting of Spring
Street. By the way, the cutting out of the diagonal part of this street
marks the final disappearance of the last bit of the oldest road in
town, that which followed the base of the hills out to the brea pits
which were the source of their roofing material. Temple Street was
originally a gift of John Temple to the city, and the suggestion
that its name be changed to Beverly Boulevard does not meet with the
approval of those who know what this man meant to the young city. He
was one of ten Americans who came to Los Angeles before 1830 and might
well become the patron saint of those later men out of the east who
come to develop us; for it is due to his public spirit they must trace
all the land titles of the city. When after we had come under the rule
of the United States it seemed advisable to survey Los Angeles the
impecunious city council had no money so Temple provided the necessary
three thousand to pay for the Ord Survey upon which all titles are
based.

At one time he extended his operations into Mexico where he acquired
lands and wealth, part of the latter due to an arrangement with
the Mexican government whereby he and his son-in-law performed
the functions of a mint, making the money for the government on a
commission basis.

Those who are interested in seeing pictures of the don and his lady,
who dreamed and built the Cerritos House and garden may find old
portraits in the museum at Exposition Park.

As for the ranches, Cerritos and Alamitos, they were both part of the
great grant of land made to Don Manual Nieto in 1784 by Governor Don
Pedro Fages, representing the King of Spain. This grant amounted to
about two hundred thousand acres which extended between the San Gabriel
and Santa Ana rivers and from the sea back to the first foothills. It
was the first of four grants made to retired soldiers before 1800.
The second was the San Pedro to Juan Jose Dominguez and the third was
the San Rafael to Jose Maria Verdugo. The fourth was beyond the Santa
Ana river, the Santiago, granted to N. Grijalva and which early in the
nineteenth century was divided between his two daughters, one the wife
of Jose Antonio Yorba, the other of Juan Pablo Peralta. Don Antonio
Maria Lugo who remembered back to 1790 is authority for this order of
grants.

At the death of Don Manuel Nieto his lands were divided into four
parcels for his heirs. The Rancho Santa Gertrudis, upon which Downey
and Rivera now stand, went to Doña Josefa Cota de Nieto, the widow of
a son; Los Alamitos, Los Coyotes and Palo Alto were the portion of
Don Juan Jose Nieto, the new head of the family; Los Bolsas was the
portion of Doña Catarina Ruiz, and Los Cerritos that of Doña Manuela
Nieto de Cota, whose title to it was confirmed in 1834 by Governor
Jose Figueroa on behalf of the Mexican government. In December, 1843,
judicial possession was given John Temple, he having paid each of the
twelve children of Doña Manuela the sum of two hundred and seventy-five
dollars and seventy-five cents. He also paid someone twenty-five
dollars for the ranch branding iron and the right to use it. I presume
that this went with the ranch and was the familiar triangle with a
curly tail that I knew in my childhood. Temple at once proceeded to
build his house and lay out his Italian garden.

It was in 1866 when Flint, Bixby & Co. bought the Cerritos. At the time
of the purchase my father’s younger brother, Jotham Bixby was made
manager, and was given the privilege of buying in at any time. In 1869
a half interest was deeded him, and the ranch carried on by him and the
older firm under the name of J. Bixby & Co.

When California came under United States rule there ensued much
confusion as to land titles and all must be reviewed and passed upon by
a specified commission. I have seen a formidable looking transcript of
these proceedings in regard to Los Cerritos, copied out in long hand
with many a Spencerian flourish, rolled in a red morocco leather cover
and tied with blue tape, all of which went to confirm the title of the
land to Don Temple.

The deed from J. Temple to Flint, Bixby & Co. and the later one of
one-half interest from that firm to Jotham Bixby are in the vaults of
the Bixby offices in Long Beach.

Because of the possible interest of the many thousand land holders now
in Long Beach and Signal Hill I recapitulate the list of early owners
of the land. The first of record is Don Manual Nieto, 1784; from him it
went to his daughter Manuela de Cota and later to her twelve heirs; Don
Juan Temple bought it in 1843, and Flint, Bixby & Co. in 1866, selling
a half interest to Jotham Bixby in 1869. In 1880 four thousand acres
of this were sold to the American Colony under the leadership of W.
E. Willmore and from this beginning has gone into the ownership of an
untold number. The name at first was Willmore City but was changed to
Long Beach about four years later when it was bought by a group of men
interested in developing it as a Chautauqua town.

The ranch was held intact for some time after its purchase by my people
and used at first almost exclusively for the grazing of sheep, at one
time there being as many as thirty thousand upon it. Later cattle were
added, but not allowed to range at will as in the Mexican days, but
confined in large fenced fields or potreros.

Just how or when Abel Stearns came into possession of the adjoining
Alamitos I do not know; from time to time he bought this and adjacent
land until he owned 200,000 acres lying between the San Gabriel and
Santa Ana rivers and for a number of years he maintained large flocks
and herds there. He built the present ranch house and used it for his
country residence.

There were very neighborly relations between him and the Temples over
on the adjoining ranch,--seven miles between houses meant little in
those days. A friendly rivalry existed between them as to the relative
speed of their horses and a race was an annual affair, the course
being from Cerritos Hill to and around a post on the bluff where
Alamitos Ave. in Long Beach now reaches the sea, four miles in all.
Horse racing was a favorite sport of the time and many stories have
come down to us, among them one of these Temple-Stearns affairs. The
stake was a thousand head of cattle and was won by Beserero, Temple’s
rather ungainly horse. On this occasion there was great rejoicing at
Cerritos, celebrations and feasting that lasted all night.

But the great drouth of ’62-’64 ended these halcyon days. Temple sold
the Cerritos, dying almost immediately afterward. Stearns lost the
Alamitos to Michael Reese, the money lender of San Francisco. My uncle
Jotham used to say that this Mr. Reese was famous for his excessive
thrift and that he came to his end thereby. It seems that he wished to
visit a certain cemetery that charged a five cents admission fee, and
that he, in order to save his money, attempted to climb over the wall,
but slipped and fell, breaking his neck.

Soon after the drouth the whole twenty-nine thousand acres of the
Alamitos had been advertised for sale for $153, delinquent taxes, but
no buyer appeared.

In the seventies it came on the market at a tempting price and young
John Bixby, who was working for his cousin Jotham as ranch carpenter,
and his wife Susan Hathaway coveted it. The wife had been in California
for a number of years and had seen the process by which Jotham with
help had been able to change from a small rancher to the prosperous
manager and half owner of the Cerritos and urged her husband to make
the attempt to do likewise. First he was to see the big Los Angeles
banker, I. W. Hellman. He said he would go into this purchase if Jotham
Bixby would; the latter said he would if Flint, Bixby would. They all
would and so it came about the Alamitos was secured, Mr. Hellman owning
one-third, J. Bixby & Co., another third and young John Bixby in as
manager with the chance to earn his third.

This ranch, like the Cerritos, had been cattle range before it became
sheep range; unlike the former it has continued to this day as a stock
ranch, and although it is many years since there have been sheep it is
well known for its cattle, horses, and mules. All the eastern portion
of Long Beach, including Bixby Park, that famous center of annual state
picnics, came from the Alamitos, and it was John Bixby himself who
bought and planted the trees that now shelter the multitudes and afford
foci for the gathering of the wandering inhabitants from each and every
Iowa county. (There were sixty thousand of them at the last picnic, I
have been told.)

Many people now familiar with Southern California have seen the old
house surrounded by trees that is on the brow of a hill out on Anaheim
Road beyond the Long Beach Municipal Golf Links. That is the old
Alamitos Ranch house. When my uncle and aunt first went there to live
it was almost a ruin, having fallen during the Reese period from the
high estate it had known when it was the summer home of the lovely
Arcadia de Bandini de Stearns. The only growing things about it were
one small eucalyptus tree and one fair sized pepper tree.

The front room had been used as a calf-pen and the whole house was
infested with rats. Uncle John told me that the first night they slept
there the baby demanded a drink, and in his passage to the kitchen to
secure one he counted sixteen of the rodents. The first improvement
they made was to cover all the holes in baseboards and walls with
portions of kerosene cans.

It was what grandfather called a “notable housewife” that undertook
the rehabilitation of that wreck of a house. Gradually as the young
couple got ahead improvements were made, each one to be rejoiced in and
enthused about by the interested visiting relatives. I remember when
certain doors were cut, when the windows were enlarged, when the first
lawn went in, when two fuchsia bushes were brought from Los Angeles,
(one of them is still in its place, bravely blossoming), and a rare
yellow calla. Aunt Susan took care of the chickens, with the privilege
of spending all her returns for books; great was the occasion when a
big stuffed armed chair could be purchased for the young head of the
family.

Little by little changes were made in the building itself, that added
to both its comfort and its charm. One of the first was the building
of a high tank with its cool house underneath which has served more
than forty years for the storing of food; only recently a self-icing
refrigerator has come to its aid. To supply this tank with water a busy
ram down by the spring, over-hung with willows and decked with water
hyacinths, steadily chug-chugged its days and nights away.

A bath room shortly followed, its installation holding the excited
imagination of the children; a little later the house sprouted a wing,
containing two bedrooms, “No. 1” and “No. 2,” and the moving of dining
room and kitchen three times marked the expansion of the home.

The growing habits of the place persist; it is alive. Each time I go
back I find some new thing, now a garden, now a modern heating plant
skillfully contrived to circumvent the cellarless condition and massive
walls, last of all a cactus garden boasting some imported sand to
simulate a desert, but crying out for rocks and stones, which are not
to be found in adobe soil.

The vision and industry of one little woman made from the dilapidated
pile of mud bricks one of California’s most charming homes, whose
generous hospitality, continued by her son and his wife, have made the
old place widely known. It is a rare thing in this new country to find
a house that has been occupied continuously by one family for almost
fifty years.

In contrast to this ranch house the one at Cerritos has fallen from its
high estate and is now but a shell of its old self. It has long been
deserted and has been kept in repair only sufficient to prevent its
meeting the fate of neglected adobes, that of melting away under the
winter rains.

Little do the many people who daily pass it on their way to Long Beach
dream of its former beauty, its gay and busy life.

Don Juan Temple planned and built it about 1844. For it he imported
bricks from the East, shipping them around the Horn. They were used in
the foundation of the house, for paving two long verandas, for marking
off the garden beds, and for lining a sixty-foot well and building a
large cistern.

From the northern forests of the state he obtained handhewn redwood
which he used for the beams, floors and other interior woodwork, and
for the twelve-foot fence about the large garden.

The walls of the house were made from the usual large slabs of
sun-dried adobe, made on the spot. They were moulded in frames
constructed for making nine or twelve at a time; this frame was laid on
a level bit of ground and packed with clay-like mud, into which straw
had been tramped by the bare feet of the Indians; when exposure to the
sun had caused the shrinking away of the bricks from the wood, the
frame was lifted and the slabs left for further drying out.

When I was a child there was a pit below the house, near the river
where water could be obtained easily, in which I have watched the
mixing of the adobe; I saw the bricks made in small quantities for
purposes of repair or the building of a new wall.

The house was built with a two-storied central portion a hundred feet
long, with two one-storied wings about one hundred and sixty feet in
length, extending toward the river. The ends of these were joined by
a high adobe wall in which there was a single gate, its heavy wooden
doors being closed at night during its earlier history, but seldom
during the later period.

Originally the roofs were flat and roofed in the usual Southern
California fashion, first a layer of redwood planks, then a covering
of sand or gravel over which was poured hot brea (asphaltum) from the
open beds beyond Los Angeles. These were the same brea pits in which in
recent years the remarkable discoveries of pre-historic animal bones
have been made. In the days when my father and uncles first came to
California there were many dangerous wild animals still at large, but
fortunately the mastodons and sabre-tooth tigers, hyenas and milder
camels were all safely put away in brea storage.

When the summer sun was hot on the roofs the asphalt grew so soft that
we could dig it out with sticks and shape it with our fingers. Such
depredations undoubtedly contributed to the unsatisfactoriness of the
overhead shelter, but even without our intervention the alternate
shrinking and expansion of the substance made the roof more or less
like a sieve in winter. Uncle Jotham soon tired of rain inside the
house in winter, no matter how much he prayed for it outside, so that
very soon after he moved into the adobe he added a good old-fashioned
Yankee roof to the main portion of the house. The roofs on the wings
did not come until after I had learned the joy of the flat ones. Here
we used to go at sunset to wait for the homecoming of the fathers, for
whose returning buggies we could watch from this vantage ground. We
also could see the whole sunset sky, and the lovely pink lights on far,
faint Baldy.

The outside of the house, as was the custom with adobes, was kept trim
with frequent coats of whitewash; the doors, window frames and slender
balusters of the upper veranda railing were a soft green, like the
tones on old copper. In the lower story the windows were iron-barred,
and in the outer walls of the wing, high up, were funnel-shaped holes
through which guns might be shot if any necessity for defense arose.

It may be because of these features that some people have called this
an old fort, but it never was one in any other sense than that a man’s
house is his castle. However the use of guns was more or less free in
those old frontier days and an occasion might arise when the man inside
might be very glad of a chance to defend himself such as those loop
holes afforded.

It was on this ranch that one of the battles at the time of the
American occupation occurred. It is recorded that the Californians
under Carillo here met, one night, Col. Stockton’s forces which had
landed at San Pedro; the Californians, by driving back and forth in the
darkness a large herd of horses, succeeded in giving the impression
of a much larger force than they really had. Perhaps they were horses
belonging to Don Temple and Don Stearns and to the neighboring
Dominguez ranch.

The approach to the house was through the large gate in the wall that
closed the patio. I think the court never was planted to any extent,
the garden being on the farther side of the house. It afforded only a
few locust trees, one large pink oleander and several hitching posts.
There was always much going and coming here, for the ranch business
involved the use of saddle horses and carriages. The animals were kept
in the barns beyond, but were brought here for all family saddles
or carriages. It was a sunny, friendly, busy place, much loved and
frequented by the many cats and dogs. I remember also a coon that
lived in a far corner for a time and some little coyotes that had been
brought in from the range.

In the right wing, next the foreman’s room, was the store room,
possibly more interesting because it was kept locked and only
occasionally did we get access to the dried apples, the chocolate, the
brown sugar and the fragrant lead foil that came in the gay boxes of
Chinese tea. Many a wise mother-cat entered the fastness through the
long window closed only by the iron bars where we could admire but not
handle her babies.

One day I discovered a very beautiful heavy white smoke pouring out
this window and hurried to find help. Father and the men who came had
great difficulty in putting out the fire that had been caused by the
drying-out and self-ignition of some stick phosphorous, kept for the
preparation of poisoned wheat for use in the war with the squirrels who
would have liked to eat up all the wheat we had raised.

Next to the store-room was a double-sized room, the usual one being
square, the size of the width of the building. Here was a great
chimney with a bellows and forge, and on the other side a long bench
well-supplied with carpenter’s tools. One of our favorite occupations
was to hunt up odd pieces of lead pipe, cut them into bits, beat
them flat on the anvil and fold over into book-like shapes which we
decorated with nail-prick design. I think it speaks something for the
tastes of our elders that it was books we made.

[Illustration: PATIO--RANCHO LOS CERRITOS--1872]

Across the court was the kitchen where Ying reigned supreme, and Fan
was his prime minister. Later Fan, having passed his apprenticeship,
moved on to be head cook at the Alamitos.

When Aunt Margaret had first come to the ranch to live there was no
stove in the kitchen, and the first morning she went down she found
her Indian boy kindling a fire by the friction of a couple of pieces
of wood. The baking was done, even after the installation of a range,
in a large brick oven out in the rear court, and Saturday afternoon
witnessed the perfection of pies, bread, cake. Once I remember feasting
on a sand-hill crane, that, too big for the kitchen stove, had been
baked in this out-door oven.

I have been asked about the character of the meals and the sources of
food supply at the ranches. As was customary at the time there was
more served than is usual at present. At breakfast there was always
eggs, or meat,--steaks, chops, sausage--potatoes, hot bread, stewed
fruit, doughnuts and cheese, and coffee for some of the grown folks.
Dinner came at noon and frequently began with soup, followed by a
roast, potatoes, two other fresh vegetables, with pickles, olives and
preserves. Salads were unknown, but we sometimes had lettuce leaves,
dressed with vinegar and sugar. For dessert there were puddings or
pies or cake and canned fruit, and cheese. It will surprise some of
the younger folk to know that mush--either cracked wheat or oatmeal
or cornmeal was a supper dish. Sometimes the main article was creamed
toast, and there might be hot biscuit, with jelly or honey or jam,
and perhaps cold meat, and always again doughnuts and the constant
cheese--very new for some tastes and very old for others.

As for the supplies--the meat all came from the ranch. Every day a
sheep was killed--occasionally a beef. Uncle John at the Alamitos built
a smoke house and cured hams. There were chickens and ducks, tame and
in season wild.

The staple groceries came from Los Angeles in wholesale
quantities--sugar and flour in barrels, navy beans and frijoles and
green coffee in sacks, the latter frequently the source of delicious
odors from the kitchen oven while roasting; it was daily ground for the
breakfast drink, and the sound of the little mill was almost the first
indication of stirring life.

At San Justo the vegetables grew in the garden but at the southern
ranches they were bought once a week from the loaded express wagon of
a Chinese peddler, whose second function was to bring news and company
to the faithful ranch cook and his helper. There was always a plentiful
supply of vegetables and the quality was of the best. I remember
hearing Aunt Susan tell that her man had brought strawberries to the
door every week in the year and she had purchased them except on two
January occasions when the berries were not quite ripe.

The chief beverage was water, there was some tea and coffee, never
wine or other liquor, except the delicious product of the fall cider
mill. Whiskey stood on the medicine shelf and I suppose sometimes
afforded relief to masculine colds, or insured against possible snake
bite--which never occurred.

Oranges, lemons, figs, and grapes grew in the Cerritos garden, and
apples and pears in the orchards, peaches, plums, and apricots were
bought from peddlers. Much fruit was canned and fresh apple sauce was
constant.

The two Chinamen prepared and served three meals a day to the family,
three to the regular men, put up noon lunches for those working away
from the house, and at the Alamitos three more meals to the nine or ten
milkers who could not eat at the same time as the other men. After this
digression I return to the listing of the Cerritos rooms.

Next the kitchen came the men’s dining room, which contained a long
table, covered with oil-cloth and flanked by wooden benches; the
constant fragrance of mutton-stew and onions, of frijoles and strong
coffee was more attractive to a hungry nose than the odors chastened
for the family meals. Harry frequently ate with the men but I couldn’t.
There are certain disadvantages in being a carefully brought up girl.

Following down the line of rooms in the left wing one came next upon
a wood-room which was given over to many tiers of willow wood, a very
necessary adjunct to a kitchen when cooking for as many as thirty
people must be done with that light wood for fuel.

In the adjoining laundry, lighted only by two doors in the thick
walls we could weekly watch, admire, and try to imitate the skillful
sprinkling of the clothes in the approved Chinese manner,--a fine spray
blown from the mouth. In those days there were no germs!

The last of the series, opening into the court-yard, was the milk room
where the rows of shining pans afforded us unstinted supplies of cream
both for the interesting barrel-churns and for the table,--clotted
cream thick enough to spread with a knife upon hot baking powder
biscuits, or a steaming baked potato. I am glad I can remember it, for
there is no evidence now-a-days that such cream ever was.

A second court off to one side was formed by the row of barns, sheds,
the granary, the hen houses, each offering a different chance to play.
On one occasion when we had climbed the outside ladder to the high
door in the granary, when it was full of wheat, we tried the difficult
feat of chasing mice across the top of the huge, soft mass of grain.
One small boy who was fast enough to catch a mouse by the tail had the
unpleasant experience of having it turn and bury its little teeth in
the back of his hand.

There was a corn crib nearer the barn and I think I must have filled my
mouth at some time full of the hard yellow kernels, for otherwise how
would I have acquired knowledge of certain sensations to enable me to
dream from time to time that my teeth have suddenly all fallen loose
into my mouth, very much over-crowding it?

Once across this court I saw a rebellious young colt who objected to
being “broken,” walk magnificently on his hind legs, and it was here
that Silverheel, the father of all the colts, and otherwise honored
as a trotter who had won races, showed his superior intelligence,
when loosed in the barn which was on fire, by dashing out, rolling in
the dirt and extinguishing the blaze in his mane. It made so great
an impression upon my little cousin Fanny that some time later when
her apron caught at a bonfire she promptly followed his example and
undoubtedly saved her life by her prompt action.

To enter the house from the court, we stepped up to the brick terrace
and through a wide, low door into a short hall that opened directly
opposite into the garden. In this hall was a narrow, steep stairway,
under which was a fascinating closet where choice bridles and old coats
and boots were kept; where there were boxes of mixed nails and bolts
and screws and tacks; on the shelf forward could be found some plug
tobacco, some small square bunches of California matches, some candles,
and a pile of pink bar soap for use at the veranda washstand. I know
yet the smell of that closet.

On the right was a door into the parlor, so low that tall Uncle John
had to stoop to enter; across the hall was the spare room. All other
rooms opened directly on the long outdoor corridor.

The rooms were dimly lighted because the windows were high, rather
small, and, on account of the thickness of the adobe wall, deep-set;
upstairs there was more light as those walls were but two-feet thick,
the lower ones being about three. At the Alamitos one of the first
things Aunt Susan did was to cut the windows to the floor. This was
never done at Cerritos.

The parlor was a small square room with one window to the court and
one to the front veranda. The walls were covered with a light flowered
paper, and on them hung four steel engravings of the “Voyage of Life,”
and the familiar picture of Lincoln and his son Tad. A large walnut
book-case occupied one side of the room. Its drawers at the base were
filled with blocks and toys for the downstairs delectation of the
succession of babies in the home. A Franklin stove in one corner kept
us snug and warm when the ocean chill crept inland. The furniture was
covered with a maroon leather, a set exactly like the one in the office
at San Justo. I associate the reading of many books with one of those
comfortable, stuffed chairs, among them _Two Years Before the Mast_,
and _Oliver Twist_.

At the table in the center of the room father and Uncle Jotham spent
many a long evening over interminable series of cribbage, and my books
are punctuated by “fifteen two, fifteen four and a run is eight.” Uncle
Jotham’s convulsive shakings made his amusement visible rather than
audible.

One night Nan was desperately ill with the croup and was wrapped up
before the fire in this room while one of the older cousins rode in
haste to Compton for the doctor. When he returned he tied his horse
hurriedly in the stall in the barn, leaving too long a rope, with the
result that somehow, during the night, the poor horse became entangled
and was strangled to death, a hard reward to him for his successful
effort to save the life of a little girl.

Another memory of this room--of a Sunday afternoon. We had all been
over to camp-meeting at Gospel Swamp, not that we were much addicted to
camp-meeting, but it was the only available service within reach, and
of course we had to go to church on Sunday. We sat on wooden benches
in the dust under the willows, not an altogether unpleasant change
from the usual pew, at least for the children, and Aunt Adelaide, who
was camping there for the week, took us to her tent afterward and
gave us some watermelon before we drove the few miles back to the
ranch. But Uncle Jotham had a more exciting aftermath. He and papa
and I were reading in the parlor after dinner when suddenly he gave a
tremendous jump and ran upstairs three steps at a time, where we soon
heard a great noise of tramping. In a minute or two he came down with
a dead lizard almost a foot long spread on his New York Tri-weekly
Tribune. Evidently it had mounted his bootleg over at camp-meeting
and lain dormant for a couple of hours before attempting further
explorations. The first jump came when the little feet struck my
uncle’s knees--harmless, but uncanny.

The usual gathering place for the family was the wide porch where the
sun upon the rose vines flecked the floor with shadows. The bricks that
paved this open corridor were laid in an herring-bone pattern and we
often practised walking with our feet set squarely on them in order to
counteract any tendency we might have to pigeon-toedness.

Beside the central door was a space in the wall held sacred and never
touched at regular white-washing time. Here was kept a record of the
varying heights of the family from year to year so that we could keep
track of our growing prowess. Uncle John, at six feet, topped the
list for his generation, but was ultimately passed by his son and two
nephews.

A Mexican olla, embedded in sand in a high box, and a long handled tin
dipper provided convenient drinking facilities, and a tin wash bowl,
nearby, just outside the dining room door, was a peremptory invitation
to clean hands for dinner.

At the other end of the porch, near grandfather’s room, was a very
long, knotted, twine hammock, in which we rolled ourselves and held
tight for a high swing. I had first known this hammock among the
trees in the yard at Skowhegan, but it had come to California with
grandfather and Aunt Martha. It had belonged to Uncle Philo Hathaway,
who, in order to earn money to complete his college course at Amherst,
had been cruising a year with Admiral Thatcher as his private
secretary. He evidently contracted Panama fever while in Caribbean
waters, for on his way home he died, and was buried at sea. The loss of
this promising young man was a great grief to all who knew him but to
his nephews and nieces who had come into this world after he left it,
he was a very shadowy figure.

The already long veranda was extended at each end by an arbor, hung
with bunches of the small mission grapes, which Harry and I were wont
to squeeze in our grimy handkerchiefs over a tin cup for the purpose of
making wine.

The garden spread before the porch, at least two acres, shut in from
intruders and sheltered from the ocean winds by the high fence. It
was laid out in three tiers of four beds, each about fifty feet
square, with a wide border about the whole. They were separated by
walks, edged with more of the imported brick. Near the house were
flowers and shrubs, but further away grapes were planted, and oranges,
pomegranates, and figs.

At the end of the rose-shaded path leading from the front door stood a
summer house, bowered in the white-blossomed Madeira vine and set in
a thick bed of blue-flowered periwinkle, which I never quite dared to
invade, lest it harbor a snake. California children were taught never
to step where they could not see. Under the seat in this little shelter
were kept the mallets and balls for the croquet set. I wonder if others
found the mallets attractive crutches, I believe it was as much fun
playing lame as it was playing legitimate croquet.

Beyond the summer house was the large brick cistern and the old well.
When Mr. Temple first made a garden he provided the necessary water by
using a ram in the river below the hill. In those days there was much
water below the hill for the Los Angeles and San Gabriel united their
waters and poured them into the lowland from which there was no good
opening into the sea. As a result the bottom lands were wooded and
swampy. Then about 1860 floods came that washed open a channel into
the ocean, and another great storm caused the river to divide, sending
most of its water through what is now known as New River which crosses
the Alamitos further east and reaches the sea some ten miles from the
old mouth. These changes, together with the increased use of water for
vineyards and orchards in Los Angeles, lowered the river level so Don
Temple dug a well, circular, six feet in diameter, and sixty feet deep.
His Indians drew the water by means of a long well-sweep. Little folk
were duly impressed with the danger of the old well, but there wasn’t
enough fear to prevent an occasional peering into its black depths, and
the dropping of a stone that took so long to reach the water below.
The empty cistern could be entered by ladders without and within and
afforded a diversion from time to time.

When the Americans came the breezes of the sky were summoned to pump
the water from a new well outside the fence, and prosaic pipes carried
it from the tank under the windmill to all parts of the garden.

All along the fence grew locust trees, whose blossoms are like white
wisteria, and at their feet bloomed the pink Castilian roses brought to
California by the Spanish padres. Over beyond the croquet ground there
was much anise among those roses--anise, the greenest, most feathery
growing thing, and withal affording sweet seeds.

In the center of the far side, shading the small gate that led to the
wool barn was a very large pepper tree into whose branches we could
climb, and near it grew many lilacs. Two of the walks held little
bricked islands in which towered old Italian cypresses, whose smooth,
small cones my cousin George assured the younger children were bat
eggs. That seemed reasonable--there must be some source for the many
bats that swooped about at night.

On a certain south-east corner grew the Sweetwater grape, the first
to ripen, and directly across the path from it was a curious green
rose, one of the rare plants of the place. The blossoms were of the
same quality as the leaves, though shaped like petals. They were not
pretty, just odd. The pink roses nearby were lovely, and so were the
prickly yellow Scotch roses. We loved the rich red of the Gloire de
Rosamonde,--isn’t that a more attractive name than Ragged Robin, or is
it after all too imposing for the friendly, familiar rose? The best
one of all was the Chromatella whose great yellow buds hung over the
pale green balustrade of the upper balcony, like the Marecial Niel, but
larger and more perfect.

In spring, spreading beds of iris were purple with a hundred blossoms
and the white ornithogalums, with their little black shoe-buttons
delighted us, while, later in the year, there were masses of blue
agapanthus and pink amaryllis and scarlet spikes of red-hot-poker.
There were no single specimens of flowers, but always enough for us to
pick without censure.

The garden did not contain even one palm tree, or a bit of cactus,
nor do I remember a eucalyptus tree, a variety belonging to a later
importation. There were two large bunches of pampas grass and two
old century plants, which we desecrated in the usual child fashion
by scratching names and pictures on the gray surface. There were no
annuals.

Orange blossoms, honey-suckle, lilac, and lemon verbena, roses,
oleander and heliotrope made a heaven of fragrance. For years the bees
had stored their treasure in the wall of grandfather’s room, which,
being a wooden addition to the house, offered a hollow space; the odor
of the honey mingled with that of the old leather bindings of his books
in the room, and with the flowers outside. The linnets, friendly, and
twittering, built about the porch, and the swallows nested under the
eaves; the ruby-throated and iridescent humming birds darted from
flower to flower and built their felt-like nests in the trees, and
great lazy, yellow and black butterflies floated by.

And children wandered here and played, or climbed the spreading tree
for the heavy figs bursting with their garnered sweetness, or picked
crimson kernels from the leathery pomegranates, or lying under the
green roof of the low-spread grape vines, told fairy stories while
feasting. There seemed no limit to our capacity for eating fruit, and I
never knew any one to suffer. One morning at an eating race I won with
thirty-two peaches, not large ones, fortunately.

Over by the wind-mill was a boggy bed of mint, and many a brew of
afternoon tea it afforded us,--mint tea in the summer house, with
Ying’s scalloped cookies, sparkling with sugar crystals, and our
mothers for guests.

[Illustration: GARDEN SIDE RANCHO LOS CERRITOS]




CHAPTER VIII THE RANCH STORY CONTINUED


Cookies were not the only things in which Ying excelled. There were
cakes fearfully and wonderfully decorated with frosting curly-cues,
and custard pies so good that grandfather always included one with the
doughnuts and cheese that little David carried in his lunch basket when
he went up to visit his brother on the famous occasion when he slew
Goliath with his sling shot.

Grandfather had left his Maine home and now sat on the sunny California
porch and charmed his child audience with versions of the Hebrew
stories that I judge he did not use in the pulpit of the dignified
village church where he had ministered for so many years. But these
adaptations existed even then, for I know now that they were not made
for us but had served, a generation earlier, to delight our mothers.
We learned how Samson’s strength returned when, in the temple of
the Philistines, the hooting mob threw eggs at him. Grandfather was
not unaware of the characteristics of mobs, for he was an avowed
abolitionist and advocate of women’s rights when they were unpopular
causes, although he himself was never favored with eggs. He used to
agree with an old Quaker of a nearby town who said, “If a hen wants to
crow, thee’d better let her crow.”

To return to his stories: there was the legend of David. When the lion
attacked his sheep he ran so fast to their rescue that his little
coat-tails stuck out straight behind him; when the lion opened his
mouth to roar David reached down his throat and caught him by the roots
of his tongue and held him, while, with his free hand he pulled his
jackknife out of his trousers pocket, opened it with his teeth, and
promptly killed the beast. Then he sat down upon a great white stone
and played on his jews-harp and sang, “Twinkle, twinkle, little star.”

I once gave this form of the story in a Sunday School class as an
object lesson in earnestness in the pursuit of duty, and when my
teacher kindly asked me where it was to be found, assured her that it
must be in one of the intervening Bible chapters that had been skipped
in our course. Imagine my chagrin as I vainly sought the text. I must
have been fourteen years old at the time.

Grandfather not only told us stories, but he opened Sunday to me for
secular reading. On my eighth birthday he had given me a copy of
Grimm’s _Fairy Tales_, and I was revelling in them when a Sunday came,
and, as we were settling ourselves on a blanket out on the grass under
the big eucalyptus tree for an afternoon with books, mother questioned
the wisdom of my reading such a book on that day. She said we would
let grandfather decide. I see him yet, looking over the tops of his
spectacles at the eager little girl who had interrupted his reading;
“I think,” he said, “that a book fit to read any day is fit to read on
Sunday.” I bless the memory of grandfather, willing to give a child his
honest judgment, and that that judgment was of a liberal mind.

I remember that about this time there was a governess in the family who
was a member of the Universalist denomination and who sometimes pined
for her own church; to comfort her, grandfather told her that he would
prepare and preach for her a Universalist sermon, which he did the
following Sunday. It may be that this small service on the old ranch
porch was the first of this faith in Southern California. Grandfather’s
catholic sympathy for various religious faiths is also illustrated by
his friendship with Rabbi Edelman and his frequent attendance upon the
services in the old synagogue on Broadway near Second in Los Angeles.

I treasure a small round lacquer box that he bought for me once from
a Chinese peddler who had walked the dusty miles from Los Angeles,
balancing on a pole over his shoulder the two large covered bamboo
baskets, so familiar to the early Californian. The whole family
gathered, while on the shady porch were spread the wonders of China.

There were nests of lacquer boxes, with graceful sprays of curious
design in a dull gold; bread boats, black outside and vermillion
within; Canton china, with pink and green people, flowers and
butterflies; teapots in basket cosies, covered cups without handles;
chop-sticks and back-scratchers and carved card-cases, all in ivory;
feather fans with ivory or sandal wood carved sticks; toys, such
as a dozen eggs in decreasing size packed one within another, tiny
tortoises with quivering heads and legs in glass topped green boxes,
or perplexing pieces of wood cut into such strange shapes that it took
much skill and time to replace the blocks if once disturbed; there
was exquisite embroidery, shawls, or silk handkerchiefs, sometimes
there was one of the queer hanging baskets of flowers and fruit
fashioned from feathers, silk and tinsel, that so delighted the Chinese
themselves but which the housewives rather dreaded receiving as New
Year gifts from devoted servants; to top off there was always the
strange candy, ginger and lichee nuts. How could so many things come
out of those baskets!

If the Chinaman was an essential part of the housekeeping, the Mexican
was an integral part of the ranch proper. When Mr. Temple lived at the
Cerritos he had great numbers of humble retainers who lived for the
most part in huts or jacals of tule or willow brush; some of the more
favored ones stayed in the wings facing the patio and others occupied
the older Cota house that stood near the river.

My cousin, George, who lived at the ranch all his boyhood, once wrote
of these people: “The men of these families had been accustomed to work
occasionally as vaqueros in the service of the rancho. There was always
plenty of meat; and frijoles and chili, with mais del pais were to be
raised under crude forms of cultivation at the foot of the hill. On
account of the death by starvation of the cattle on the over-stocked
ranges the occupation of these people was gone and they soon vanished
seeking fields of usefulness elsewhere....

“Among the Temple retainers, however, was one strong and stalwart
character, the most perfect horseman and acknowledged leader of the
vaqueros, Juan Cañedo. He was manifestly attached to the land by strong
ties of sentiment, and set up the claim that Mr. Temple had sold him
with the ranch to Mr. Bixby, with whom he intended to stay.... This
man was expert in the use of the reata--the left hand as well as the
right--and was easily superior to any of those now exhibiting in the
wild west shows. For those days this sort of thing was the life of the
people, not their pastime, and this was a picked man among them.”

George knew and loved Old Juan as long as he lived, provided for his
old age, stayed with him when he died, and for many years paid monthly
the widow’s grocery bill.

When the little boy was four his father had a saddle made especially
for him and Juan delighted to show him how to ride, to make a horseman
of him; he also served as a teacher of Spanish. Juan never condescended
to speak English, although he understood it, so my conversations with
him were one sided, for I regret to say that my knowledge of Spanish
was very meager.

He looked like a bronze statue, brown face, brown clothes, brown horse
and infinite repose. Many a time have I seen him ride out of the
courtyard gate followed by the hounds, Duke, Queen, Timerosa, and
others of forgotten name, to hunt coyotes, the constant menace to the
sheep.

There were many other interesting men who worked at the ranches.
There was always a Jose; I remember a romantic looking Romulo,
and Miguel, who is now spending his last days a tenant of the old
house. Over at Alamitos there was a jolly, fat vaquero with a heavy
black beard and twinkling eyes, who was known as “Deefy”--I spell
phonetically,--because scarlet fever at twelve had stolen his hearing.
He remembered enough of language to speak, but did so in the most
uncanny, guttural and squeaking sounds. He was a friendly soul and
never so appalling as dignified Old Juan.

Then there were all sorts of other nationalities represented in one
way or another; Parlin, a Maine man, always predicting disaster, and
speaking only in a whisper; Roy, the Englishman, John “Portugee,” Henry
and Charlie, young Americans getting a start, and the merry Irish John
O’Connor who always had time for a joke with the children, and whose
departure was mourned when he left the Cerritos to open a saloon on
Commercial street in Los Angeles.

Just a few years ago at Uncle Jotham’s funeral in Long Beach I was
touched to see a whole pewful of these men who had worked for him in
the old days at the ranch, even John O’Connor among them.

I recall Sunday evenings at the Alamitos when Uncle John got out his
fiddle, and men who had other instruments came into the parlor and we
had a concert that included _Arkansaw Traveler_, _Money Musk_ and
_Turkey in the Straw_. There had been a piano in the parlor at the San
Justo, but neither Cerritos nor Alamitos boasted piano or organ.

To this day the employees on the Alamitos come to the home for
merry-making at least once a year when the hostess provides a Christmas
party with a tree and candy and a present for everyone connected with
the ranch, from the great grandmother of the family down to the last
little Mexican or Japanese that lives within its borders.

Although sheep were the earliest interest gradually cattle were added.
Instead of the large herds ranging freely, as they had under Don
Temple and Don Stearns, we kept them in great fenced fields, on both
the ranches and over on the Palos Verdes. Those were exciting mornings
when, at dawn, the men and boys started off for the rodeo, or round-up,
on the hills beyond Wilmington, Uncle Jotham and father in the single
buggy with two strong horses that would take them up and down ravines
and over the hills where no roads were; the boys of the family, and
the vaqueros, on horseback. I couldn’t go, I was a girl and must be a
lady,--whether I was one or not.

But fashions change, and the Alamitos girls today have always been
horsewomen with their father, and can handle cattle better than most
men; and then they can lay aside their ranch togs and don a cap and
gown and hold their own in a college, or in filmy dress and silver
shoes, grace a city dance,--competent and attractive daughters of
California.

Aunt Susan, grandmother to these girls, was most hospitable, especially
to children, and Uncle John, with his jokes and merry pranks, a delight
to them. I shall always hear the sound of his voice as he came in the
back door of the hall, danced a sort of clog and called some greeting
to his little wife. He always wore at the ranch boots with high
heels,--cowboy boots.

Often there would be gathered at the Alamitos, in addition to the
children who belonged, half a dozen cousins with their friends, and the
small Hellmans, whose father was a part owner in the ranch. The house
was elastic, and if there were not beds enough there were mattresses
and blankets to make warm places on the floor. The privilege of
sleeping in the impromptu bed was a much coveted one.

A favorite resort was the great barn, a still familiar sight to
passers-by on the Anaheim Road. It was made from an old government
warehouse taken down, hauled over from Wilmington and rebuilt at the
ranch, forty odd years ago. It afforded magnificent leaps from platform
to hay or long slides on the slippery mows. Up among the rafters
were grain bins, whose approach over narrow planks added a spice of
danger--a mis-step would have meant a thirty foot fall, but we never
made mis-steps. In the central cupola Fred and Nan kept house, while
the babies were parked in the bins.

“Old Sorrel,” a friendly mare, lived down in the pasture beyond the
wool-barn, and might be ridden for the catching. She seemed to like
to carry a backful of small people, extending from her mane to her
tail. Fred had a real horse, “Spot,” for riding but “Sorrel” was the
playmate. Harry had one of those favored horses of old California,
cream-colored with silvery trimmings, and he called him by the general
name of his kind, “Palomino.”

There were fish to be caught in New River below Alamitos, catfish and
carp that could be taken home and eaten. One day Fred and I, wandering
about, came upon some that had been speared and left by poachers. We
were indignant, but could do nothing to the men we saw drive away.
However, we could prevent the waste of good fish, so we took them to
the house, neglecting to tell the cook that we had not just killed them
ourselves. They could not have been too dead, for no one suffered from
eating them.

Kittens and puppies abounded and new chickens, pigs, and calves or
colts provided constant interest. Once when two insignificant little
dogs were assisted out of the world little Sue took comfort in thinking
they would look very cute in Heaven tagging around after God every time
He went for a walk.

The son of the house staged one spring a new entertainment. His father
took great pride in his first litter of twelve thoroughbred Berkshires,
and every day each member of the family inspected the new pigs. One day
the son of the chief dairyman dared the boy to kill them, which dare
he immediately accepted, doing the execution with a pitchfork. Then
followed a thrashing, weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth and no
more slaughterings!

I was not involved in this affair, but I cannot claim
blood-guiltlessness. I recall with a shudder my participation in the
stabbing of fat frogs in a shallow pool; even then it sent shivers up
and down my spine, but I could do almost anything the boys could. I
did draw the line at knocking down swallows nests and feeding the baby
birds to the cats, although Harry maintained that this was necessary to
prevent the introduction of bed-bugs from the nests into the house. A
year or two later the boy went out with a new gun that had been given
him, but came back telling me that he could not shoot turtle doves
who sat in so friendly a fashion together on the fence rail and made
mournful sounds, neither could he shoot rabbits, for they looked at
him. He was a sensitive boy and the earlier killings belonged to our
primitive stage of development.

In those days I frequently watched, in spite of mother’s wish that I
should not, the daily butchering of a sheep, not so much the actual
slaying, but the skinning and the removal of the slippery, interesting
insides; a daily course in anatomy. And blown-up bladders made
wonderful playthings.

One of the most interesting features of the Alamitos was the
cheese-making that was done on a large scale, two hundred cows being
milked for the purpose night and morning. To improve the milk for
this Uncle John imported some of the first registered Holsteins into
Southern California. There was great excitement among us children, and
undoubtedly a fair degree of it among the grown-ups, when a carload of
fine animals arrived from New York, prominent among them being several
members of the Holstein family of Aaggie, a magnificent bay stallion,
and about a dozen Shetland ponies. For a number of years Mrs. Bixby’s
span of these harnessed to a tiny buggy were a familiar sight about
Long Beach.

She was a skillful driver and I shall never forget a night ride I had
with her when I was a little girl. I was going home with her from
Los Angeles for a few days at the ranch. We took the train at the
Commercial street station at about five o’clock, and when we reached
Wilmington at six it was already dark. We went to the livery stable
where the teams had been left for the day, and then set out for the
ranch, Uncle John in his gig with Fred, the small boy, tucked in under
the seat. In the wide, single-seated buggy drawn by two lively horses,
Aunt Susan drove, with me between her and the nurse, who held the baby
girl. The night was so dark and the fog so thick that we could not see
the horses’ heads, much less the road. We followed close to my uncle,
who called back every few minutes, and found the way across the bridge
and started along Anaheim Road, not a street lined with houses as it
now is, but just a track across the bare mesa. It was before the day of
Long Beach.

Slowly, slowly, we went along, almost feeling our way, blindfolded by
the mist. There was not a light or a sound, and soon we lost Uncle
John, but Aunt Susan did not fail in courage and told us she was going
to give the horses their head and trust them to take us home. Bye and
bye, after two hours they came to a stop and we found we were on the
brow of the hill, above the wool barn, just a few steps from the house.
It was relief enough for me to have come home, what must it have been
to the woman driving!

One other foggy drive I took many years later. I was fifteen and had
been for several days at the Alamitos, among other things drawing the
spots of several new Holstein calves on the blanks of application for
registration, that being a privilege reserved for me, the wielder of
the pencil among us. In order to be back in school Monday morning, I
had to be taken over to Long Beach to meet the first Los Angeles train.
How many times have I eaten lamp-lit breakfasts in the old ranch dining
room and started off in the sweet fresh morning, to watch the dawn and
hear the larks sing as we drove!

This foggy morning Uncle John was driving and as it was April there was
a pearly light over every thing. Every hair of his beard and eyebrows
was strung with tiny drops of water; we had a most happy hour, drawn by
Thunderbolt and Lightfoot. The next day came word of sudden sickness.
In ten days my merry young uncle was dead. It did not seem possible. It
was my first realization of death. And childhood ended. When my mother
had gone I was ten, and while it seemed strange, it did not stand out
from all the strangeness of the world as did this later coming face to
face with the mystery. In the case of my mother I missed her more as
years went by than I did at the time of the actual separation.

Aunt Martha was distressed when after mother’s death she came to us,
to find how often we children played that our dolls had died. We held
a funeral service and buried them under the sofa in the parlor after a
solemn procession through the long hall. We wore towels over our heads
for mourning veils, copied not from any used in our family, but from
those of two tall, dark sisters who sat in front of us in church, whose
crepe-covered dresses and veils that reached the floor were a source of
unfailing wonder.

As I look back it does not seem to me that the playing of funerals
involved any disrespect or lack of love for our mother, but was,
rather, a transference into our daily activities of a strange
experience that had come to us.

We had another play that was connected with a death, but at the time
I did not recognize the relationship. Just before we came south for
the long visit, Harry’s five year old sister Margaret had died of
diphtheria and was buried in the ranch garden. Soon after our arrival
a mason came and set up a gravestone for her. Beside her grave were
those of an older sister, and of a little unnamed baby. The ranch had
been robbed of its children and the heart of the young mother sorrowed.
Harry had been devoted to Maggie and was disconsolate without her, so
that I must have been a most welcome visitor for the lonely small boy.
Taking our cue from the mason we spent many hours in the making of mud
tombstones for our bird and animal burial plot over near the graves
of the children. I modelled them and he polished them and put on the
inscriptions.

We wandered about day after day, in the cool summer sunshine,--so near
the ocean that oppressive heat was rare. As soon as breakfast was
over, away we went. I was clad in a daily clean blue-and-white checked
gingham apron, Harry, although but seven, in long trousers, “like the
men.” We romped in barn or garden, visited the corrals or gathered the
eggs; we played in the old stage left in the weeds outside the fence,
or worked with the tools in the blacksmith shop. When the long tin horn
sounded at noon the call for the men’s dinner we returned to the house
to be scrubbed. I was put into a white apron for meal time, but back
into my regimentals as soon as it was over. A second whitening occurred
for supper and lasted until bedtime.

Sometimes we went down to the orchard, where all summer long we could
pick ripe apples and pears; and occasionally, as a rare treat, we were
allowed to go barefoot and play in the river, reduced to its summer
safe level. One day, after having built elaborate sand houses and laid
out rival gardens, planted with bits of every shrub and water weed we
could find, we went to a place deep enough for us to sit down in water
up to our necks, where, grinning over the top of the water, we enjoyed
an impromptu bath. We hung our clothes on a willow until they were dry
and then wondered what uncanny power made our mothers know that we had
been wet.

A half mile or so beyond this ford lived Uncle Marcellus and Aunt
Adelaide, and their boys, Edward and Herbert, who used to come over
to help at shearing time. Just inside their front door they had a
barometer shaped like a little house where a woman came out and stood
most of the time, but if it were going to rain the gallant husband sent
her inside and stood guard himself.

The largest and loveliest hyacinths I have ever known grew for this
aunt, and she had tame fish in her pond that would come and eat
breadcrumbs which we gave them. Aunt Adelaide was a very short woman
with the shiniest, smooth, dark hair that never turned gray. It went in
big waves down the side of her face. Once she showed mother a number
of large new books and told her about a way to study at home and learn
just as if you were going to college, and a long time afterwards she
showed us a big piece of paper that she said was a Chautauqua diploma
and meant that she had studied all those books.

Every time we went over to the station on the railroad, or came back,
or went to Compton to church or camp meeting, or came back, we always
saw the old house that had been the first ranch house, belonging to
the Cotas, but which had now only pigeons, many, many shining lovely
pigeons living in it,--and so many fleas that we called it the “Flea
House” and knew better than ever to go into it.

But we were not afraid to go into the deserted coyote hole that we
found in a bank down on the side of the hill below the house. Luckily
we did not find a rattlesnake sharing it with us.

The sum of child happiness cannot be told. How good it is to wander
in the sun, smelling wild celery, or the cottonwood leaves, nibbling
yellow, pungent mustard blossoms while pushing through the tangle; how
good to feel a pulled tule give as the crisp, white end comes up from
the mud and water, or to bury one’s face in the flowing sulphur well
for a queer tasting drink, or to cut un-numbered jack-o-lanterns while
sitting high on a great pile of pumpkins of every pretty shape and
color, and singing in the salty air; how good to wander in the sun, to
be young and tireless, to have cousins and ranches!




CHAPTER IX FLOCKS AND HERDS


Sheep were the main interest of the ranches, in fact were the prime
reason for them. I do not know how many there were all told, but on the
Cerritos alone there were often as many as thirty thousand head, and
upwards of two hundred thousand pounds of wool were marketed annually
in San Francisco. At first the wool was shipped from Newport Landing,
but in my day it went from San Pedro.

There was little demand for mutton in the south, so from time to time,
in order to dispose of aged surplus stock a band of several thousand
sheep would be driven overland to San Francisco. The start would be
made in the spring when the grass was green on the hills, so that as
the stock moved slowly on they found good feed and reached the city
happy and fat,--to meet their doom.

In the early days I understand that Flint, Bixby & Co. imported merino
sheep and materially improved the quality of California wool. I
remember that at the San Justo there was a majestic ram with wool that
hung to the ground, who lived in state in the fine sheep barn with a
few favored wives. I know that the little girl was warned not to be
friendly with him as he was not kind and gentle.

Most of the sheep, however, lived out on the ranges, in bands of about
two thousand, under the care of a sheepherder and several dogs. These
men lived lonely lives, usually seeing no one between the weekly
visits of the wagon with supplies from the ranch. Many of the men
were Basques. Often there was some mystery about those who took this
work,--a life with the sheep was far away from curious observation, and
served very well for a living grave. Once I overheard talk of a herder
who had been found dead in his little cabin. He had hanged himself. And
no one knew what tragedy in his life lay behind the fatal despondency!

One of the men who had been a cabinet maker made me a set of tiny
furniture out of cigar box wood, a cradle, table, bureau, book case
and three chairs, all delicately fashioned and showing him to be a
skilled craftsman. I suppose this man so cut off from normal human
relationships enjoyed the occasional visits of the little girl who rode
about the ranch with her father.

Every week a man from the ranch made the rounds of the sheep camps,
carrying mail, tobacco, and food,--brown sugar, coffee, flour, bacon,
beans, potatoes, dried apples. On the morning when this was to happen I
have watched the flickering light of the lantern travel back and forth
over the ceiling of the room where I was supposed to be asleep, as the
finishing touches were put on the load, and the horses were brought and
hitched to the wagon before daylight, so that the long rounds could be
made before night.

Twice a year, spring and fall, the sheep came up to be sheared, dipped
and counted. Father usually attended to the count himself as he could
do it without confusion. He would stand by a narrow passage between two
corrals, and as the sheep went crowding through he would keep tally by
cutting notches in a willow stick.

During shearing time we heard new noises out in the dark at night,
after we were put to bed, the candle blown out, and the door to the
upper porch opened. Always there were crickets and owls and howling
coyotes, and overhead the scurrying footsteps of some mouse on its
mysterious business, or the soft dab of an errant bat on the window,
but now was added the unceasing bleat of thousands of sheep in a
strange place, and separated, ewe from lamb, lamb from ewe.

Shearing began on Monday morning, and on Sunday the shearers would
come in, a gay band of Mexicans on their prancing horses, decked with
wonderful, silver-trimmed bridles made of rawhide or braided horsehair,
and saddles with high horns, sweeping stirrups, and wide expanse of
beautiful tooled leather. The men themselves were dressed in black
broadcloth, ruffled white shirts, high-heeled boots, and high-crowned,
wide sombreros which were trimmed with silver-braided bands, and held
securely in place by a cord under the nose. They would come in, fifty
or sixty strong, stake out their caballos, put away their finery, and
appear in brown overalls, red bandanas on their heads, and live and
work at the ranch for more than a month, so many were the sheep to be
sheared. They brought their own blankets and camped out. Their meals
were prepared in a cook wagon.

Once at the Alamitos, a number of men had sleeping places in the hay
in the old adobe barn, each holding his chosen bed most jealously from
invasion. Half a dozen of us children, starting after breakfast on the
day’s adventure, after taking slices from the raw ham stolen from the
smoke-house and secreted in the hay, spied some clothes carefully hung
on the wall above the mow, and the idea of stuffing the clothes into
the semblance of a man was no sooner born than it was adopted. Our
whole joy was in doing a life-like piece of work. Fan gave us a paper
bag for the head, which we filled and covered with the hat. Little
we knew how seriously a hot-tempered Mexican might object to being
fooled. In the evening when the men came into the barn the owner of the
particular hole in which our dummy was sleeping was furious at finding
his place occupied. He ordered the stranger out. No move. He swore
violently. Still no move. He kicked. And as he saw the man come apart
and spill out hay instead of blood, his rage knew no bounds, his knife
came out, and it was only by good luck that we children were not the
cause of a murder that night. Uncle John made rather vigorous remarks
to us about interfering with the workmen.

There were wool-barns at all three of the ranches that I knew, but
I officiated at shearing most often at the Cerritos. Here the barn
was out beyond the garden, facing away from the house, and toward a
series of corrals of varying sizes. The front of it was like a covered
veranda, with wide cracks in the floor. Opening from this were two
small pens into which a hundred sheep might be turned. The shearer
would go out among these sheep, feel critically the wool on several,
choose his victim and drag it backward, holding by one leg while it
hopped on the remaining three to his regular position. Throwing it
down, he would hold it with his knees, tip its head up, and begin to
clip, clip, until soon its fleece would be lying on the floor, the
animal would be dismissed with a slap, and the wool gathered up and
placed on the counter that ran the length of the shearing floor. Here
the grown boys of the family tied each fleece into a round ball and
tossed it into the long sack that hung in a nearby frame, where a man
tramped it down tight. When the Mexican delivered his wool at the
counter he was given a copper check, the size and value of a nickel,
marked J. B., which he presented Saturday afternoon for redemption. It
is a fact that frequently the most rapid workmen did not get the most
on pay day, simply because they were less skillful or lucky as gamblers
than as shearers.

I remember going one evening out into the garden and peering through a
knot-hole at a most picturesque group of men squatting about a single
candle on the wool barn floor, playing with odd looking cards, not like
the ones in the house. The pile of checks was very much in evidence.

George told me that it was his father’s custom for many years to carry
the money for the ranch payroll from Los Angeles to Cerritos in a small
valise under the seat of his buggy, sometimes having several thousand
dollars with him. This habit of his must have been known, but he was
never molested. George maintained that there was a code of honor among
the prevalent bandits to respect the old citizens as far as possible.

I had beautiful days during shearing. Sometimes I was entrusted with
the tin cup of copper checks and allowed to deal them out in return
for the fleeces delivered. I spent much time up on this same counter
braiding the long, hanging bunches of twine that was used for tying up
the fleeces into balls. I worked until I became expert in braiding any
number of strands, either flat or round. A few times I was let climb up
the frame and down into the suffocating depths of the hanging sacks,
to help tramp the wool, but that was not a coveted privilege,--it was
too hot and smelly. I loved to watch the full sack lowered and sewed
up and then to hold the brass stencils while the name of the firm and
the serial number was painted on it before it was put aside to wait for
the next load going to Wilmington. Never was there a better place for
running and tumbling than the row of long, tight wool sacks in the dark
corner of the barn.

Many a check was slipped into our hands, that would promptly change
into a watermelon, fat and green, or long and striped, for during the
September shearing there was always, just outside the door, a big
“Studebaker” (not an auto in those days) full of melons, sold always,
no matter what the size, for a nickel apiece. It has ruined me
permanently as a shopper for watermelons; nothing makes me feel more
abused by the H. C. L. than to try to separate a grocer and his melon.

I seem to have gotten far away from my subject, but, really I am
only standing in the brown mallows outside the open end of the wool
barn, watching the six horse team start for Wilmington with its load
of precious wool that is to be shipped by steamer to “The City,” San
Francisco, the one and only of those days.

As soon as the shearing was well under way the dipping began. This was
managed by the members of the family and the regular men on the ranch.
In the corral east of the barn was the brick fireplace with the big
tank on top where the “dip” was brewed, scalding tobacco soup, seasoned
with sulphur, and I do not know what else. This mess was served hot in
a long, narrow, sunken tub, with a vertical end near the cauldron, and
a sloping, cleated floor at the other. Into this steaming bath each
sheep was thrown; it must swim fifteen or twenty feet to safety, and
during the passage its head was pushed beneath the surface. How glad it
must have been when its feet struck bottom at the far end, and it could
scramble out to safety. How it shook itself, and what a taste it must
have had in its mouth! I am afraid Madam Sheep cherished hard feelings
against her universe. She did not know that her over-ruling providence
was saving her from the miseries of a bad skin disease.

Now the sheep are all gone, and the shearers and dippers are gone
too. The pastoral life gave way to the agricultural, and that in turn
to the town and city. There is Long Beach. Once it was a cattle range,
then sheep pasture, then, when I first knew it, a barley field with
one small house and shed standing about where Pine and First Streets
cross. And the beach was our own private, wonderful beach; we children
felt that our world was reeling when it was sold. Nobody knows what a
wide, smooth, long beach it was. It was covered near the bluffs with
lilac and yellow sand verbenas, with ice plant and mesembreanthemum
and further out with shells and piles of kelp and a broad band of
tiny clams; there were gulls and many little shore birds, and never a
footprint except the few we made, only to be washed away by the next
tide. Two or three times a summer we would go over from the ranch for
a day, and beautiful days we had, racing on the sand, or going into
the breakers with father or Uncle Jotham who are now thought of only
as old men, venerable fathers of the city. Ying would put us up a
most generous lunch, but the thing that was most characteristic and
which is remembered best is the meat broiled over the little driftwood
fire. Father always was cook of the mutton chops that were strung on
a sharpened willow stick, and I shall never forget the most delicious
meat ever given me, smoky chops, gritty with the sand blown over them
by the constant sea breeze. I wonder if the chef of the fashionable
Hotel Virginia, which occupies the site of our outdoors kitchen,
ever serves the guests so good a meal as we had on the sand of the
beautiful, empty beach.




CHAPTER X EL PUEBLO DE NUESTRA SEÑORA LA REINA DE LOS ANGELES


Los Angeles was about ninety years old and I about one when we first
met, neither of us, I am afraid, taking much notice of the other. For
over twenty years San Francisco had been a city, a most interesting
and alive city, making so much stir in the world that people forgot
that Los Angeles was the older; that her birth had been ordained by
the governor and attended with formal rites of the church and salutes
from the military way back in 1781, when the famous revolution on the
east coast was just drawing to a successful close. Until the stirring
days of ’49, San Francisco was insignificance on sand hills. Then her
rise was sudden and glorious and the Queen of the Angels was humble.
But she was angelic only in name. She was a typical frontier town with
primitive, flat-roofed dwellings of sun-dried bricks, much like those
built in ancient Assyria or Palestine. Saloons and gambling houses were
out of proportion in number, and there were murders every day. The
present crime wave is nothing in comparison.

My father first saw Los Angeles in January, 1854, when he was camped
with his sheep on the Rancho San Pasqual; his arrival was a few months
later than that of Mr. Harris Newmark, who, in his book _Sixty Years
in Southern California_, so vividly describes the village as he found
it.

By the time I knew it there had been a great change. There were some
sidewalks, water was piped to the houses, gas had been introduced;
several public school buildings had been built; there were three
newspapers, _The Star_, _The Express_, and _The Herald_. The public
library had been founded,--it occupied rooms in the Downey Block where
the Federal Building now stands, and Mary Foy, one of Los Angeles’s
distinguished women, had begun her public service as a young girl in
attendance. Compared with what it had been twenty years before, Los
Angeles was a modern, civilized city; compared with what it is now, it
was a little frontier town. At school I once learned its population to
be 11,311.

We lived first on Temple Street, near Charity. Once Los Angeles boasted
Faith and Hope Streets as well, but only Hope remains, for Faith has
turned to Flower, and Charity masquerades as Grand.

Next door to us lived a Jewish family whose girls sat on the front
porch and amazed me by crocheting on Sunday. I had not known that any
Jews existed outside the Bible. Perhaps this family was the nucleus for
the present large colony of Hebrews that now fills the neighborhood.

Temple Street was new and open for only a few blocks. Bunker Hill
Avenue was the end of the settlement, a row of scattered houses
along the ridge fringing the sky. Beyond that we looked over empty,
grassy hills to the mountains. Going down the first hillside and over
towards Beaudry’s reservoir for a picnic, I once found maidenhair
ferns under some brush, and was frightened by what sounded like a
rattlesnake--probably only a cicada. Court Street disappeared in a
hollow at Hope, where a pond was made interesting by a large flock of
white ducks.

Across the street from us on top of a hill that is now gone, at
the head of a long flight of wide steps, stood “The Horticultural
Pavilion,” destroyed a few years later by fire. It was replaced by
Hazard’s Pavilion, an equally barn-like, wooden building on the site
of the present Philharmonic Auditorium. The first Pavilion held county
fairs, conventions, and operas. It was in this place that I once had a
great disappointment, for when I was hearing _Pinafore_ a child ahead
of me suddenly coughed and whooped, and I was removed with haste just
at the most entrancing moment. The opera had been put on in London
first in the spring of ’78. It had reached Los Angeles by ’79, and we
revelled in its wit and melody with the rest of the world.

It must have been somewhat later than this that the city took such
pride in the singing of one of its own girls, Mamie Perry (Mrs.
Modini-Wood) who was educated abroad and made her debut in Italy.
Another name that will recall many a concert and social event to old
timers is that of Madame Mara.

In this building I once saw a strange instrument, a box into which one
could speak and be heard half a mile away at a similar contraption--a
very meek and lowly promise of our present telephone system.

At this fair, where there were exhibited fruits, jellies and cakes,
quilts and long strings of buttons, when the mania for collecting them
was at its height, I remember that some ladies, interested in the new
Orphans’ Home, served New England dinners, in a room decked as an old
fashioned kitchen with spinning wheels and strings of corn and drying
apples. Among them were my mother and Mrs. Dan Stevens, two slender,
dark-haired young women, wearing colonial costume and high combs--my
mother, who so soon after left this world, and Mrs. Stevens, still
among us, loved and honored for her many good works.

Mrs. Stevens tells me that this was at the time of the visit of
President and Mrs. Hayes and a party of government officials, the first
president of the United States to come to California. All Los Angeles
turned out to welcome them, although there was enough bitter partisan
feeling left to cause some neighbors of ours to walk past him in line
while refusing to shake the hand of the man who they believed usurped
Tilden’s rightful place.

The celebration began with speaking from a grandstand built in front of
the Baker Block, followed by a reception given to Mrs. Hayes and the
ladies of the party in the parlors of the fashionable St. Elmo Hotel,
still standing but now fallen to low estate.

After this the presidential party went to the county fair at the
pavilion where there was more speaking, a public reception and a formal
dinner. Dr. David Barrows contributes as his memory of this great
occasion--the memory of a small boy who had been brought down from the
Ojai Valley--his amazement to observe that Secretary Sherman kept his
cigar in his mouth while making his address. It was during this speech
that a little boy came forward bringing a great bouquet, the gift of
the local florist, but suffered so from stage fright that he refused to
mount the platform and my small sister, standing near, was substituted.
She marched serenely across the stage, delivered the flowers to Mrs.
Hayes, was kissed by her, then by the speaker, and final glory, by the
President himself. I am sure it was the most lime-lighty moment of
Nan’s modest life.

This bouquet was not the only gift we afforded our distinguished
visitor. The other was a cup and saucer, fearfully and wonderfully made
of sectors of red, white and blue cambric, stitched round and round
until it was stiff by a little hole-in-the-wall sewing-machine agent.

After inspecting our fruits, vegetables, cookery, button strings and
other fancy work the party was entertained at dinner by the leading
women of Los Angeles in the improvised New England kitchen at the fair.
The city council granted them the privilege and appropriated toward
expense the generous sum of twenty-five dollars, all the council could
afford toward banqueting the most distinguished party that had yet
visited the City of the Queen of the Angels, so said Mayor Toberman.
But every grower of fine turkeys or prize fruit or vegetables and every
notable maker of preserves brought in offerings in kind so that in
spite of the council’s thrift a most generous feast was spread before
our guests.

Speaking of politics recalls the wonderful torchlight processions of
a later period when I, with my cousins, shouting little Republicans,
perched on the fence at their residence on the corner of Second and
Broadway and delightedly recognized our fathers under the swinging,
smoky lights.

I happened to be in Maine during the Blaine-Cleveland campaign and once
rode upon a train to which Mr. Blaine’s special car was attached. It
interested me to see that when he got out at one station for a hasty
cup of coffee at a lunch counter, he poured the hot liquid into his
saucer to drink. Was that doing politics, being one of the people,
or was it simply that the mouth of a presidential candidate is as
susceptible to heat as that of an ordinary mortal? I was much edified,
as I was not accustomed to saucer-drinking. When the train reached
Boston towards midnight, it was met by a most gorgeous torchlight
parade and a blare of music.

When Garfield died, Los Angeles had a memorial service and a long
daylight procession headed by a “Catafalque,” (a large float,
gruesomely black), on which one of my schoolmates, Laura Chauvin, rode
to represent, I suppose, a mourning angel. Later its black broadcloth
draperies were used to make souvenirs and sold for some deserving
cause. We purchased a pin-ball the size of a dollar, decorated with a
green and white embroidered thistle,--a curious memento of a murdered
president.

But I have been lured by memories of processions as is a small boy by
martial music, away from my ordered account of where I have lived in
Los Angeles. The second year we moved to the Shepherd house, (so-called
because of its owner), where presently my brother, Llewellyn Bixby,
junior, in direct answer to my prayers, came through the ceiling of the
front bedroom straight into the apron of Mrs. Maitland,--a two-day-late
birthday present for me. So I was told. My sceptical faculty was
dormant.

This house still stands at the top of the precipice made by the cutting
of First Street between Hill and Olive Streets.

The lot in front was very steep, with zig-zag paths and terraces, in
one of which was a grove of banana trees, where fruit formed, but,
owing to insufficient heat, never ripened well. Do you know the cool
freshness of the furled, new, pale green leaves? Or how delightful it
is to help the wind shred the old ones into fringe? One by one the red
and gray covers for the circled blossoms drop, and make fetching little
leather caps for playing children.

In those days the hill had not been hacked away to make streets, and
where now is a great gash to let First Street through there was then a
breezy, open hill-top, whereon grew brush and wild-flowers. The poppies
in those days were eschscholtzias (the learning to spell the name was
a feat of my eighth year), and were not subjected to the ignominy
of being painted with poinsettias on fringed leather souvenirs for
tourists. The yellow violets were gallitas, little roosters, perhaps
because in the hands of children they fought to the death, their
necks hooked together until one or the other was decapitated. The
brodiæas, or wild hyacinths, sometimes now called “rubbernecks,” were
called cacomites, (four syllables), a word of Aztec origin brought to
California by people from Mexico where it was applied to a different
flower but one having like this one a sweet edible root.

Between the weeds and bushes there were bare spots of ground where,
by careful searching, one might find faint circles about the size of
a “two-bit” piece. Wise ones knew that these marked the trap doors
of tarantula nests. It was sport to try to pry one open, with mother
spider holding it closed. We young vandals would dig out the nests,
interested for a moment in the silky lining and the tiny babies and
then would throw away the wrecked home of the gorgeous black velvet
creatures that did no harm on the open hill side.

At this house Harry and I conducted an extensive “essence factory,”
collecting old bottles far and near, and filling them with vari-colored
liquids, obtained by soaking or steeping different flowers and leaves.
We used to drink the brew made from eucalyptus leaves. The pepper
infusion was pale, like tea; that made from old geraniums was of a
horrible odor,--hence we liked to inveigle innocent grown folks into
smelling it. The cactus solution was thick, like castor oil, and we
considered it our most valuable product, having arrived thus early
at the notion that difficulty of preparation adds to the cost of a
manufactured article.

North of us were several houses containing children--and here I found
my first girl play-mates--Grace and Susie, Bertha and Eileen. The level
street at Court and Hill, protected on three sides by grades too steep
for horses, was our safe neighborhood playground. I never go through
the tunnel that now has pierced the hill without hearing, above the
roar of the Hollywood car, the patter of flying feet, the rhythms of
the witch dances, the thud-thud of hop-scotch, the shouting boys and
girls defending goals in Prisoner’s Base, the old, old song of London
Bridge, or the “Intry mintry cutry corn” that determined who was “it”
for the twilight game of Hide-and-Seek--and then the varied toned bells
in the hands of mothers who called the children home.

We played school, jacks, marbles, tag, and an adaption of Peck’s Bad
Boy, and, between whiles, dolls. Even Harry played with them when we
were still youngsters--say eight or nine. He didn’t seem young to me
then--he was just himself. I called him “Hab.” My aunt tells of finding
us once about our housekeeping, he doing the doll family washing, and
I papering the house. In our menage there was no sex distinction as to
the work to be done.

We girls, as we grew a little older, had a collection of small dolls,
none over four inches long, and the various marriages, deaths, and
parties kept us busy. I tailored for the whole group, having apparently
a talent for trousers, which early experience undoubtedly encouraged
me in later life to gather in all the stray pantaloons to cut over into
knickerbockers for my numerous boys.

Raids on the Chinese vegetable wagon provided supplies for our cooking
over a row of small, outdoor fire-places we had built in a low bank
in our yard. Once my mother was much disturbed to find a little pot
of squirrel meat cooking on the stove. She needn’t have worried, for
I knew as well as she that strychnine, slipped into a small piece of
watermelon rind, transferred its evil potency to the body of the little
beast that ate it. But it was sport to hang him up as I had seen the
men do at the ranch when butchering a sheep, to skin him and dress the
meat, and pretend it was a stew for Isabel, the doll. I had a large
collection of squirrel skins tacked up on the barn at the Shepherd
house.

After a couple of years we built our own house in the same neighborhood
on the south-east corner of Court and Hill Streets. It began as a seven
room cottage, white with green blinds to suit father. Later the roof
was raised and a second story inserted and the house painted a more
fashionable all-over gray, to suit the ladies.

My mother was a happy woman when, after eleven years of married life,
she moved into her very own home. A few months later she suddenly died,
leaving my father widowed a second time, a lonely man for the remaining
fourteen years of his life.

Mother had never been a strong woman and was unable to withstand an
attack of typhus fever, contracted when on an errand of kindliness to
a sick and forlorn seamstress. I often wish I might have an adult’s
knowledge of mother,--my child memories are beautiful. She was tall and
slender, with quantities of heavy brown hair, dark eyes, and unusual
richness of color in her cheeks which is repeated in some of her
grandchildren. It amuses me to recall that I had such absolute faith
in her word that on one occasion when she had visited my school and a
girl remarked upon what a beautiful mother I had, I stoutly denied the
allegation, for had she not herself assured me that she was not pretty?

I suppose that her New England conscience and native modesty could not
allow even her little daughter to tell her how lovely she really was.
I am told that she “had a knack of clothes” and I remember some of
them well enough to confirm the opinion. Her taste allowed beautiful
materials and much real lace, but of jewels there were none except some
brooches that performed useful service and the wedding and engagement
rings that held sentiment.

It was a sad thing that just when her dearest wish, that for her own
home, was fulfilled, she must leave it and her three babies for some
one else to care for. Fortunately her dearly loved, next-older sister
was able to take her place.

At the time we built there seemed to be but two styles of architecture
in vogue, one square on a four room base and the other oblong on a six
room plan, the narrow end being to the street, with one tier of rooms
shoved back a little in order to provide a small porch,--we chose the
latter. Every such house had a bay window in the projecting end, that
being the front parlor, and all windows visible from the street must
have yellow, varnished inside blinds.

One evening while the building was going on we went over as usual for
our daily inspection and noted that the newly set studding marked the
coming rooms. The connecting parlors seemed small to our eyes and
tastes not yet trained to apartment and bungalow court proportions, so
on the following morning father ordered out the wall between proposed
front and back parlor, and our large sitting room,--living room it
would be called today, was ordained. It, was unusual in Los Angeles
where the prevailing mode demanded the two parlors. This room was large
enough, 18’ x 33’, to stand the height of the ceiling, fourteen feet.
Wide, high double-doors opened into the hall, opposite similar ones
into the reception room, giving a feeling of spaciousness to the house.

The furnishing was of necessity more or less that which it is now
customary to damn as mid-Victorian,--walnut furniture and a wealth of
varying design in carpet, curtains, upholstery, wall-paper; but the
whole in this case was kept in harmony by a key color, a medium olive,
relieved by soft shades of rose and tan. Even the woodwork was painted
to match the ground color of the walls, instead of glistening in the
usual glory of varnished redwood or yellow pine. Everything was in good
taste except a fearful and wonderful ceiling that was wished on us by
the local wall-papering nabob. How fortunate that the walls were so
high it was almost out of sight!

Over our heads were the two plaster of Paris centerpieces from which
lighting fixtures sprang, first hanging lamps with prismatic fringes,
later gas chandeliers. These fruits and flowers were tinted and gilded.
Around them was a cream colored sky, set with golden stars, small ones,
not planets,--limited in extent by an oval band of brocaded red velvet,
this being the pet aversion of Aunt Martha. Outside this pale there was
a field of metallic colored paper with an all-over design like chicken
wire; next came a border of flowers and something modest to connect the
whole artistic creation with the side wall.

We had a ceiling, but there were many things characteristic of the
period that we did not have. We never had a “throw,” nor a gilded
milking stool with a ribbon bow on one leg; we never had a landscape
painted on the stem of a palm leaf, nor oranges on a section of orange
wood; we did not hang in any door a portière made of beads, shells,
chenille ropes or eucalyptus seeds, all of which things were abroad in
the land.

The room contained four bookcases, a rosewood square piano, a large
table, a sofa and several easy chairs. From the walls looked down upon
us Pharoah’s Horses, The Stag in the Glen, and the Drove at the Ford,
(suitable subjects the vogue provided for a family dependent upon
livestock), but these were not all, for there were a few reproductions
of old masters, a fine portrait of grandfather in his youth, and
a picture of the sweet-faced mother who had gone to Heaven, as we
children said.

At one end of the room was a white marble mantel with a large grate,
always annoying us by its white patchiness in the low toned room, but
contributing cheer with the coal fire that, through more than half the
year, burned all day long. Los Angeles had no furnaces in those days,
but the family was suited by the single fireplace, for one could choose
the climate he wished from torrid zone near the grate to arctic in the
bay window, where the goldfish circled their watery globe.

The room was the center of a happy family life, where, of an evening,
all read by the light of the student lamp, or indulged in games,
dominoes, authors, crambo, or logomachy, sugar-coated ways of getting
training respectively in addition, names of books and writers,
verse-making and spelling. Father rarely went out, and after the
reading of his evening paper might join a lively domino tournament or
amuse himself with solitaire.

Until the very last years of his life he busied himself at odd jobs
about the house. Sometimes it would be a session with the grandfather
clock, sometimes it would be chopping wood. He had the willow brought
up from the ranch in long pieces, which he cut and stacked under the
house. He raised chickens and at first cared for a horse and cow. Later
we kept two horses, dispensed with the cow, and had a man for the
livestock and garden and to drive us about town. We did not have a dog
regularly but always cats, classical cats. Æneas was very long-legged
and Dido lived with us a long time. I think it was she who went every
evening with father for his after dinner walk and cigar.

One Thanksgiving time the wagon from the ranch came, bringing us a
couple of barrels of apples, a load of wood and a fine turkey for the
feast day. Imagine our dismay, one afternoon, to see it mount up on its
wings and soar majestically from our hill top back-yard down to the
corner of First and Broadway below. He escaped us but, I presume, to
some one else he came as a direct answer to prayer.

Father was always interested in flowers and was very successful in
making them grow. Usually there was a box of slips out in the back
yard. Often he would bring in a rich red Ragged Robin bud, dew-wet, to
lay by mother’s napkin for breakfast. For himself he put a sprig of
lemon-verbena in his button-hole. For some reason, he excepted orange
colored flowers from his favor. He made mock of the gay little runners
by twisting their name into “nasty-urchins.”

The windows of my room, directly over the parlor, were covered with a
large, climbing “Baltimore Belle,” an old-fashioned small cluster rose
that I never see now-a-days. From my side window I looked out on a long
row of blue-blossomed agapanthus, interspersed with pink belladonnas,
flowers that in summer repeated the blue of the mountains touched at
sunset with pink lights.

Every night when ready for bed, I opened the inside blinds and looked
at the mountains and up to the stars and enlarged my heart, for what
can give one the sense of awe and beauty that the night sky does?

The location of our home on the brow of a hill was chosen because
of the view and the sense of air and space. Below us was the little
city, the few business blocks, the homes set in gardens on tree shaded
streets, the whole surrounded by orchards and vineyards. On clear days
we could see the mountains far in the east and the ocean at San Pedro,
with Santa Catalina beyond.

One very rainy winter, possibly ’86, we watched the flood waters from
the river creep up Aliso Street and into Alameda: we saw bridges go out
and small houses float down stream. Then it was that Martin Aguierre, a
young policeman, won the admiration of everyone when he rode his black
horse into the torrent and rescued flood victims from floating houses
and debris in mid-stream. One of the girls in my room at school lost
all her clothing except what she wore, and we had a “drive” for our
local flood-sufferer.

This was a very different river in summer. I once saw a woman whose
nerves had been wracked by dangerous winter fordings when the water
swirled about the body of the buggy, get out of her carriage, letting
it ford the Los Angeles river while she stepped easily across the
entire stream. She had a complex, but she didn’t know that name for her
fear!

Beyond the river and up the hill on the other side stood, stark
and lonely, the “Poor House,” the first unit of the present County
Hospital. Many a time when the skies forbore to rain I had it pointed
out to me as my probable ultimate destination; for, after the bad
middle years of the seventies when to a general financial depression
was added a pestilence that killed off all the lambs, and to that was
added a disastrous investment in mines, the firm of Flint, Bixby & Co.
was sadly shaken, and it was of great moment whether or not sufficient
moisture should come to provide grass and grain for the stock. So, if
the sun shone too constantly and the year wore on to Christmas without
a storm the ominous words, “a dry year,” were heard and the bare
building across the river loomed menacingly. But it always rained in
time to save us!

Rain and overflowing rivers connote mud. Walkers on the cement
sidewalks beside our paved streets little realize what wonderful mud
was lost when Progress covered our adobe. With its first wetting it
became very slippery on top of a hard base, but as more water fell and
it was kneaded by feet and wheels, it became first like well-chewed
gum and then a black porridge. I have seen signs that warned against
drowning in the bog in the business center of town. An inverted pair
of boots sticking out of a pile of mud in front of the old Court House
once suggested that a citizen had gone in head first and disappeared.

Small boys turned an honest nickel or two by providing plank
foot-bridges or selling individual “crickets” which the wayfarer might
take with him from corner to corner. As the sun came out and the mud
thickened the streets became like monstrous strips of sticky fly
paper. We walked the cobblestone gutters until our rubbers were in
shreds, or, when necessity drove us into the gum, lost them.

A friend assures me that one Sunday morning she set out for a church
near the center of the city, that she made slow progress for a block
and a half, and then, realizing that so much time had passed that she
could not arrive in time for service, turned around and went home. It
had taken her an hour and a half to make the round trip amounting to
three blocks.

There is no mud so powerful when it is in its prime as adobe, and when
it dries in all its trampled ridges and hollows, it is as hard as a
rock. It takes all summer to wear it down level, ready to begin over
again with the new rains. There are a few places yet, where, some rainy
day if you are feeling extra fit, you may try a stroll across a Los
Angeles street and learn to sympathize with a captured fly.

Certain other interesting kinds of soil are also covered up in Los
Angeles. On the southwest corner of Temple and Broadway there is mica
cropping out between the strata, and up by Court Street Angel’s Flight
there is a nice white formation very like chalk. I liked to cut it into
odd shapes.




CHAPTER XI MORE ABOUT LOS ANGELES


I am still a person somewhat young and lively who has had the strange
experience of seeing barley fields sprout houses like the magic
soldiers from the sowing of dragon’s teeth; of finding cactus and
gravel and sage turned over night into leagues of orange trees; of
watching my little city multiply itself a hundred fold. What wonder
that I cannot forbear to talk about it! to tell of how once upon a time
the street of sky-scrapers was a shaded way before a few rose-covered
cottages, or how the hills of Hollywood were bare brown velvet beyond
the vacant fields that lay west of Los Angeles’ Figueroa Street, itself
unfinished. When we looked over the town from our home on the Court
Street hill we saw a place of trees and cottages, of open spaces and
encircling groves. Only to our left were business houses, and they
neither high nor imposing. On Poundcake Hill, where now the County
Court House rises, was the square, two-storied high school building,
which a few years later crossed Temple Street on stilts, and went over
to its new abiding place on California Street.

Just below us was the old jail, enclosed by its high white fence which
may have shut in prisoners and shut out the curious who approached on
Franklin Street, but whose secrets were wide open to the sky. Once our
whole back yard and the top of our chicken house and barn were black
with men strangely eager to look down upon a fellow man whom we, the
public, were hanging high upon a gallows within that old stockade. We
children were shut in the house and did not see, but the next day my
small brother and another tiny boy were found trying to hang each other.

The jail was in the rear of the city buildings, a row of low adobes
on Spring Street, opposite the old court house, the one built by John
Temple. Nearby, the post-office occupied the first floor of the new I.
O. O. F. building, a little too far south to be sure,--nearly to First
Street,--but perhaps the spaciousness and freshness compensated for its
distance from the business center to the north. Across the way from it
there stood a small white cottage, with a hedge of cypress and a lawn.
My first school was around the corner in a similar white house, and on
my way home I was permitted to stop and get our mail from our box at
the post-office.

The shopping district ran from this “civic center” up to the plaza, the
very region that is now being retrieved for the heart of the public
life of Los Angeles city and county.

Not long ago I discovered, stranded high on the front wall of an old
brick building, the abandoned sign of “The Queen,” the store from which
came my “pebble-goat” school shoes, the store itself long ago having
followed the shoes “to the bone yard.”

In Temple Block were many offices, but I remember it as the abode of
Godfrey, the photographer, who, plentifully supplied with red velvet
fringed chairs and pronged head braces, took the pictures of the
Angelenos.

Over in the Downey Block, where now the U. S. Government Building
stands, and in the buildings to the north, were some of our most
frequented stores, among them Meyberg’s Crystal Palace, a source of
china and glassware, and Dotter and Bradley, whose furniture firm later
took the name of Los Angeles Furniture Co. A little Barker store was
born over near First and Spring, but that was so far from the center of
things, and chilly and lonely, that it moved nearer to the Plaza,--and
now Barker Brothers aspires to be the largest furniture “emporium” in
the world with a palace on Seventh Street!

I knew something of Commercial and Los Angeles streets as business
thoroughfares, but their importance was passing, and the new Baker
Block was the last word in elegance, and the pride of all the dwellers
in Los Angeles. Here Rev. B. F. Coulter opened a drygoods store that
continues to this day in the fourth location that I remember, moving
first to Second and Spring, then following the fashion up to Broadway
and later going to Seventh. Then as now this establishment specialized
in blankets, perhaps because Mr. Coulter had a woolen mill over the
hill where now is the corner of Figueroa and Fifth streets. There was a
little stream there that was called Los Reyes,--the Kings,--rather a
humble place for royalty in a city of the Queen of the Angels.

Two favorite shops of that time have disappeared, that of Dillon
and Kennealy, who carried a line of most lovely linens from their
Irish homeland, and the City of Paris, “the best place for lace and
trimmings,” I used to hear. That was before the time of ready-made
clothing, and real ladies were most particular about the quality of
materials used and the nicety of workmanship.

One day a small new store, with a fifty foot frontage, appeared at
the corner of Temple and Spring. Good shoppers soon recognized high
grade materials and efficient salesmanship, and the firm had to move a
few doors south to obtain larger space, and then, made bold by public
favor, it went pioneering way out among the residences on Broadway
near Third, to remain a few years until it set the fashion of Seventh
street,--J. W. Robinson & Co.

Mrs. Ponet supplied the ladies with bonnets, when Miss Daley didn’t,
and Mr. Ponet framed our pictures and buried our dead.

As I was only a little girl in those days, I do not know so much about
the shopping habits of the gentlemen, but I remember that they bought
hats from D. Desmond, cutlery from C. Ducommun and watches and jewels
from S. Nordlinger.

Not long ago I picked up an old map of Los Angeles showing a new
subdivision just west of Figueroa. The map was issued by Stoll and
Thayer, who with Hellman, Stassforth Co., were the chief purveyors
of school books, slates, Christmas cards with silk fringe, lace
paper valentines and other necessities. Here I bought those classics,
McGuffy’s Fourth Reader, Robinson’s Arithmetic, Harper’s Geography, and
Collier and Daniel’s Latin Book.

For years it was necessary for anyone desiring a book other than those
standard works known to druggists and stationers to send away for it,
so it was a great thing for lovers of literature when Mr. C. C. Parker
came to town and opened a book shop for books only,--no twine or glue
or notebooks or cosmetics or toys, not even text books admitted to his
shelves.

Over east of the shopping district lay Chinatown, at one time a very
interesting and picturesque part of Los Angeles, having at least
7,000 inhabitants, but owing to the Exclusion Act of the nineties now
dwindled to 2,000. With its going has come a distinct loss in color, to
say nothing of the much regretted race of competent and loyal household
servants.

There used to be three joss houses, or Chinese temples, and a theatre
with a large troupe of players, including a lady star, a rarity, as
usually all the actors are men. There was weird music to be heard,
there were feasts and fortune tellers and funerals where the chief
figure was rushed at break-neck speed to the cemetery, followed by a
spring wagon load of food while loyal friends scattered bits of paper
to distract the attention of the devil in his pursuit of the newly dead.

But the life was not all picturesque. There were slave women and tong
wars and murders and individual persecutions of Chinese by low grade
whites, and ever the haunting memory of the massacre of 1871 when
nineteen Chinese lost their lives at the hands of a mob.

The changing of prestige of hotels has marked the changing city. Just
now the Biltmore holds the center of the stage, last year it was the
Ambassador, once it was the Bella Union, perhaps the most interesting
of them all, dating as it did, back into pueblo days. The Pico House
of the early seventies prided itself on rivalling the San Francisco
hostelries, but before a decade had passed it had to yield first place
to the St. Elmo, the place chosen in which to do honor to Mrs. Hayes,
the wife of the President. I have personal memories of both the Pico
and the St. Elmo. In the first we once stayed several days during one
of my earliest trips to Los Angeles, and in the second I climbed the
red velveted stairs, holding my mother’s hand to greet the chief lady
of the land. The poor old place is now a ten cent lodging house, just
north of the post office.

When the Nadeau, towering four stories and containing all the latest
wrinkles, was completed it easily assumed first place, but in such
a bustling, booming town it soon had to pass the favor on to the
Hollenbeck; then came the Westminster and the Van Nuys, which I believe
still clings to a little back-water distinction.

The sudden end of the boom about eighty-seven had one very excellent
result, it saved us the chagrin of having our finest caravanserie
called Hotel Splendid--it never got beyond the foundations, out at
Tenth and Main. Perhaps the name was no worse than San Francisco’s
Palace which has built about itself such a tradition that no one stops
to consider the self-assumption of its designation.

During those boom years Los Angeles was having its first experience
of rapid growth, and we were almost as proud and boastful then as we
are now,--at least in quality if not in quantity. It seemed just as
exciting to suddenly grow from ten to fifty thousand, as it does to
aim at a million or two. We hadn’t invented the name realtor for our
land sellers or established courses at college in realtoring, but there
were already enterprising boosters. One of them displayed in his office
window this hospitable biblical text: “I was a stranger and ye took me
in.”

It was during that period that we boldly discarded gas as a means of
lighting our streets and adopted electricity, the first city in the
land to do it. How imposing were our six tall poles each carrying four
arc lights, four substitute moons, protected by a little tin umbrella.
What strange and beautiful blue light filtered through our windows,
making on the walls black shadows of the swaying eucalyptus branches
like Japanese silhouettes.

The summer that we first had these wonder lanterns the very sky put
on a nightly pageant of color, most gorgeous sunsets to celebrate our
progress, and incidentally to mark the fact that the upper air was full
of a fine ash from a volcanic eruption in far away Java.

I wonder what we could do now if the railroads should start another
rate war as they did when the Santa Fe first came into Southern
California. Tickets from the middle west dropped to five dollars, and
on one day went down to one. We would need a host of Aladdins with
obedient genii to build in a minute not palaces but just plain houses
and schools,--the fact is that one or two such magic builders would not
at all be despised by our present boards of education.

I have spoken of stores and public buildings and hotels and real-estate
offices but they were not all that the streets afforded; there was a
barber shop where father and I got our respective hairs cut, accepting
the fragrant offering of bay rum, supposed to ward off head colds
due to the exposure of lightening one’s head covering, but refusing
emphatically the hair oil in the pink, brass-nozzled bottle. Then there
was the fruit stand next to Wollacott’s Wholesale Liquor Establishment
near the post office where we bought the ceremonial bananas that
completed the barbering, bananas at five cents apiece. If none could
be found a like amount was invested in sugary peppermint drops. These
delicacies were eaten at the little Wells Fargo office on the east side
of Temple block where there was time enough and little enough doing for
Mr. Pridham and father to tilt back their round chairs and have a good
gossip.

One day we went over to investigate the crowd that had gathered on the
covered sidewalk in front of the Baker Block on North Main Street.
Suddenly a man came balancing across the tight rope that was stretched
above us. I saw him stop there over our open-mouthed heads and flip a
flap-jack in the pan he carried. I do not know why he thus showed his
prowess nor what his reward, but he furnished a passing entertainment
for the inhabitants of Los Angeles back in the later seventies, and his
ghost still walks in mid-air for me whenever I go through that old part
of town.

His is not the only walking spirit. There in the Plaza still stands
the shade of the peripatetic dentist, fore-runner of Painless Parker,
who once stood for several days in a red and gold chariot containing a
gorgeous, throne-like chair; for a consideration he pulled teeth of any
who were in search of relief.

Still a third ghost walks and calls in unforgotten accents, “Ice
Cream,” the white-clad Mexican who went about the town with a freezer
on his head, and in his hand a circular tin carrier, with a place for
spoons in the middle and holes for the six tumblers in which he served
his wares. There was a great scurrying for nickels among the children
when his cry was heard in the land.

In those days two street car lines meandered, the one way out to
Agricultural Park (Exposition), a large bare space with a few old
eucalyptus trees, and the grand stand beside the race-track; the other
south on Spring to Sixth and then up to Pearl, the name of Figueroa
street, north of Pico where the bend is. Each line boasted two cars so
that simultaneous trips in opposite directions were possible. The cars
were very small and drawn by mules; there was no separate conductor;
we put our tickets--bought at the neighboring drug store--into a glass
box near the door. It is told that on the Main street line it was the
custom for the driver on late trips to stop the car, wind the reins
around the brake handles, and escort lone lady passengers to their
front doors,--so much for leisure and gallantry in old Los Angeles.
Even as late as 1890 the car once waited while a lady ran into Mott’s
market for her meat!

Sometimes we took the car for Sixth and Pearl and then walked on down
to Twelfth, where Aunt Margaret lived for a time. The street was a
grass-bordered road and along the west side the footpath followed a
zanja (a ditch for water). Mr. H. K. W. Bent, the postmaster, and a
man who was in every way a value to the community, had an orange grove
here and lived in it. As I passed it I would meditate, not on his
high position, (he was my Sunday School superintendent), but on the
strange thing I had heard about him. He ate pie for breakfast! That
was undoubtedly a taste brought straight from New England. We happened
to import a different one; we had doughnuts twice a day every day in
the year. His taste, being different, was queer. I guess each family
had beans and brown bread at least once a week, with frequent meals of
boiled codfish, attended by white sauce and pork scraps.

The trip on the other line was out past vineyards, an occasional
house, one of them being the adobe mistakenly called the headquarters
of General Fremont, far, far away to the race-track, to see our
Silverheel trot.

But we did not go often, and then only as a concession to the fathers,
for races were frowned upon by mothers as being unsuitable for
Christians and girls.

The circus, however, was not under the ban, and “joy was unconfined”
when we heard the shrill calliope in the streets and saw the line
of elephants and caged lions and gay horsewomen filing along Spring
Street. There were usually enough children in the family to provide
excuses for all the men-folk who longed to attend the show as
chaperones. Grandfather felt that seventy years of abstinence justified
him in examining a circus thoroughly and Harry was his lucky escort,
when, with his inhibitions released, he visited everything, even to the
last side-show.

After a full fledged Barnum and Bailey the small tent on the lot now
graced by the Times building where trained horses and dogs performed
for a month was too tame for the gentlemen, but afforded pleasure to
the children.

Once Los Angeles was small enough to be very happy during county fair
week, with its races and shows of fine stock and the usual indoor
exhibits of fruits and grains, its fancy work and jellies, and then the
fair developed into orange shows and flower festivals and finally into
the fiesta. We lined the streets with palms and decked the buildings
with the orange, red and green banners and played and paraded for a
week in April, the peak of Spring. We saw our redshirted firemen
with their flower-garlanded, shining engines, drawn by those wisest
of animals, the fire horses; bands played, Spanish cavaliers and
señoritas appeared again in our midst, marvellous floats vied for first
prize--gay days.

Who that saw the many-footed dragon that wound its silken, glistening
way out of Chinatown into our streets can ever forget its beauty. Or
the floats that carried the bewitching little Chinese children wearing
their vivid embroidered garments and beaded headdresses? Alas, they are
buried now in their American coveralls and corduroys.

What happened to us? Did we grow too unwieldy, or too sophisticated or
were we swamped with midwest sobriety? We gave our parade to Pasadena,
who put it in wintry January instead of fragrant, flowering April; San
Bernardino has the orange show, fiesta has disappeared altogether. But
I have heard whispers that indicate that mayhap the spirit of pageantry
and frolic is about to return to Los Angeles.

Many changes have come but each phase as it exists seems the natural
condition; the old days that I have been recalling were the “Now” that
we knew. In the past there was less hurry and more room in our streets
that were built to be but ways between cottage homes where now and
then a wagon or carriage might go. However, there were no more hours a
day to fill or dispose of than we have now. We could stroll down the
street to do our errands, meeting friends at every turn; we could drive
if preferred, and although Harry Horse and the phaeton made slower
progress than Henry Ford or Lionel Limousin, he did not have so far
to go and he could stand as long as he wished before the shop door, so
that the time consumed by my lady was no more than in these days of
suburban homes, and parking places far, far from where she really wants
to go.

In the matters of health, friendship, intelligence, the number of
inhabitants in a city are of little moment; happiness does not increase
with population.

I find it interesting, however, to have in my mind pictures of the
little vanished village that once was Los Angeles. I also find it
interesting to watch its present turmoil and energy and to speculate on
its future; to see signs of intellectual, artistic and social vitality
that exist among the scattered groups and individuals now pouring into
this seething community; to wonder how soon the wheels of progress are
going to stop rattling long enough for us to hear ourselves think,
catch our breath and develop some sort of cohesive social organism.

It is the fashion just now to make a butt of Los Angeles, to see
only its obsessions, its crudities, its banalities. Those who really
comprehend the amazing number of people daily crowding in upon us,
and remember that the bulk of the people are inevitably strangers to
each other, each ready to shift responsibility to someone supposedly
an older citizen, cannot but have patience, cannot but rejoice in the
really fine things that have been done and are doing.




CHAPTER XII THE BACK COUNTRY AND THE ADMIRAL


For seventy years after its founding in 1781 Los Angeles was the only
pueblo, as distinguished from presidio or mission, in the southern part
of this state; and until the sudden growth of San Francisco during the
gold excitement, it was the largest city in California, boasting about
twenty-five hundred inhabitants when it came under American rule. Of
the three neighboring missions, San Gabriel and San Juan Capistrano
antedate Los Angeles by a few years, while San Fernando was founded
about twelve years later.

During the Spanish and Mexican regimes California’s population was
largely scattered upon the ranchos, and this condition remained for
nearly a generation after the settlement of the northern counties.
The story of the life in this grazing land is familiar,--the story of
its leisureliness and hospitality; of its life on horseback, of the
great herds of black, lean, long-horned cattle, the offspring of the
few animals brought in by the padres; of the devotion of the founders
of the missions, of their prosperity and then of their decline under
the secularization of the Mexican law. Even as late as the time of my
childhood the country was still very empty and Los Angeles was a little
city set in gardens and orchards, a narrow border of cultivated lands
separating it from the wide, almost treeless, valley.

An exception to this general condition was the district to the East,
centering about the San Gabriel; this mission early won the title
Queen of the Missions, not because of the size or beauty of church or
location, but because of the large number of Indians under its care,
and the extent of its herds, orchards, vineyards and grainfields.
Its cattle, estimated variously from 75,000 to a 100,000, roamed the
great valley even to the foot of the mountains San Gorgonio and San
Jacinto; for convenience in administration a branch, or asistencia, was
established at San Bernardino in 1810.

The San Gabriel vineyard numbered a hundred and fifty thousand vines,
from cuttings brought from Spain, and the making of wine and brandy
(aguadiente) became an important industry. Its orchards, at their peak,
contained over twenty-three hundred trees, most of them oranges, which
the padres introduced, together with olives, pomegranates, and lemons.
The gardens were surrounded with adobe walls or cactus hedges as a
protection against marauding cattle or people, who, as one padre once
quaintly said, “put out the hand too often.”

The first San Gabriel oranges were planted in 1804 by Padre Tomas
Sanchez. Thirty years afterward the earliest grove in Los Angeles was
set out by Don Luis Vignes, to be followed in 1841 by that of William
Wolfskill, whose orchard later became famous as the largest in the
United States. He was instrumental in bringing in many new plants to
this country, and the beauty of his home place was great. His gardens
gave way for the Southern Pacific Arcade Station, his orchard ground
is covered by the city’s business, and no one thinks of Los Angeles as
once the actual center of California’s orange growing industry.

And as these groves have been supplanted by the houses of trade, the
Mission’s orchards have been transformed into homes. But when I was a
little girl they still remained, had even been extended by those who
came into possession after the secularization of San Gabriel.

Many of the names now familiar around Pasadena were the names of these
estates. For instance, San Marino and Oak Knoll were the properties of
Don Benito (Benjamin) Wilson, and his son-in-law, J. De Barth Shorb.
Don Wilson was one of those Americans who came here during the Mexican
rule, married into an old California family, and became identified with
the land. It is for him that the astronomical peak is named, because
it was he who at the expense of much money and labor built the trail
to the top of the ridge. He had hopes of finding timber suitable for
making of casks for his wine, but although he failed in this there was
some lumber brought down on burro back.

Another familiar name is El Molino, the old mill which the mission
built. It fell into disrepair, but was rescued by Col. Kewen, who made
of it a charming home, while developing an estate about it. The story
of Mrs. Kewen’s five hundred callas for an Easter at the Episcopal
Church has come down. Callas were in better repute then than now.

Mrs. Albert Sidney Johnson called her new home in California Fair Oaks,
the name of her Virginian birthplace. Los Robles (The Oaks), was the
home of Governor Stoneman.

Old timers will recall the estate of L. J. Rose, Sunny Slope, famous
both for its wines and brandies and for its stables of fine horses.
Major Truman in his book, _Semi-tropic California_, dating from 1874,
speaks of this district as a “fruit belt, two miles wide and ten miles
long,” and calls it the California Lombardy.

It was just next door to this region of wine and brandy that the
temperance people from Indiana started their colony on a portion of the
old San Pasqual grant, the ranch where Flint, Bixby & Co. had pastured
their sheep after the desert crossing in 1854. This colony devoted
itself to oranges, not so intoxicating as grapes, and gave the name of
the chief industry to the fashionable avenue. After a time they began
to call themselves Pasadena, an imported name, and after a little more
time we in Los Angeles began to know about the new settlement which was
getting big enough to maintain a modest daily stage to the city,--a
spring wagon. The road followed much the same route as is used today,
down across the unbridged Arroyo Seco and over the flowery field that
later became Garvanza, a field filled in spring with great masses of
wild blossoms, poppies, and lupine, larkspur, tidy-tips, and pink
owl-clover,--pink tassels we children called them; past the Sycamores,
the popular country beer-garden, through the little settlement known as
East Los Angeles, along Buena Vista street (North Broadway), so called
because of its attractive outlook across the early gardens and orchards
of Los Angeles, and on into the Plaza. The earliest name for this
street was Calle de Eternidad--Eternity Street--because it was the road
to the cemetery.

One of the places reached by this road was the hill near the point
on the brink of the Arroyo where ostriches now congregate, which was
a favorite place for the city picnickers,--far away when measured by
hay-wagon speed and untouched by any “improvements.” It was there one
spring day that my schoolmates and I, of that grade which studies
American colonial history, acted out a recent lesson, “storming the
heights of Abraham” up the steep hillside, pushing our way under the
oaks, through brush, past great clumps of maiden-hair fern to the mesa
atop where we found a million seeming butterflies, the mariposa lilies,
hovering over the grass.

While Pasadena was growing up to the west of the old district, “Lucky”
Baldwin was developing on the east that loveliest of all oak-clad
ranches, the Santa Anita, and making of it a show place sought by the
few hardy and intrepid tourists who were beginning to find their way
into Southern California, making a name for it far and wide not only
because of its beauty but because of his famous racing stables.

Beyond that there wasn’t much that a child would even hear of,--there
was a ranch at Duarte and another called Azusa, and then far to the
east, across foothills covered with sage and cactus, and mighty
“washes” filled with granite boulders was Cucamonga Ranch with its old
winery and vineyard, planted sometime in the forties by members of the
Lugo family from the Rancho Santa Ana del Chino, across the valley. I
understand that Chino means curly and relates to the character of the
locks of an early owner. This ranch was under the management of Isaac
Williams, a son-in-law of old Don Antonio Maria Lugo, the man who at
one time held leagues and leagues of land all the way from San Pedro to
San Bernardino. For many years it was a most hospitable way-station for
all travelers from over the plains to Los Angeles. At the time when my
father came through the Chino supported ten thousand head of cattle,
half as many horses and thirty-five thousand New Mexican sheep. What
it was twenty-five years later I do not know, but the hey-day of the
ranches was over and the new town had not yet come.

In the far eastern end of the valley was the old town of San
Bernardino, so named probably because it was on that Saint’s day that
the padres established their _asistencia_. With the downfall of the
missions this early development was stopped, moreover the troubles
with “wild” Indians were greater here than in localities further from
the mountain passes. The present town dates from 1851 when a company
of Mormons, about four hundred strong, came across the deserts and
mountains from Salt Lake City, and purchasing a portion of the San
Bernardino Ranch from the Lugos, rapidly put a large acreage under
cultivation.

This ranch was owned by three young Lugos and their cousin, Diego
Sepulveda, whose grand-daughter, Mrs. Florence Schoneman, tells me that
they were delighted to sell and get a chance to move nearer the center
of life at Los Angeles and consequently made the easiest terms with the
colonists--something like $500 down and the balance to be paid after
crops began to bring in returns.

Before long these thrifty settlers were shipping vegetables, flour
and dairy products into Arizona and to Los Angeles, a three-day haul
away. Their flour was ground in the mill built by Louis Rubidoux, who
had purchased a portion of the neighboring Jurupa grant from Don Juan
Bandidi, to whom the grant had been made a year or two after the time
he was traveling down the coast aboard the sail ship whereon Richard
H. Dana was spending his two years before the mast. Louis Rubidoux,
whose name is kept in mind by the mountain that guards the entrance to
the modern Riverside, was a Frenchman, a native of St. Louis, who had
come into California in 1840 by way of New Mexico. He was a cultivated
man and a successful rancher who later became interested in cutting
up his land into smaller holdings and has the name of being the first
“sub-divider” of Southern California, the one who set the fashion that
has of late grown to such appalling proportions.

The beginnings of Riverside were made in 1870 when a colony of
people from various places in the East bought some of this bench land
above the Santa Ana River. Although the first plan was to go into the
cultivation of the silk-worm for which there was a great enthusiasm
for a year or two even to the extent of general bounties offered by
the State legislature, it was not long before the town was in its
characteristic groove; by the time we had moved to Los Angeles the
first naval orange had fruited and the first Glenwood Inn offered a
setting for hospitality,--Riverside, oranges, tourists! But I knew
nothing about it. Why should I? It was far away and very small, so far
in fact that its inhabitants, according to a local history, allowed
a week for a trip to Los Angeles and return. At first they had to
drive all the way but after a few years there was a railroad extending
toward them as far as Uncle Billy Rubottom’s. And who now knows where
that was? It wasn’t Pomona, which then was barely in embryo, being
represented by the few settlers under the San Jose Hills on the
properties belonging to the Palomares and the Vejars, and later to
the Phillips. “Uncle Billy” came from Spadra Bluffs in Arkansas, and
maintained a very popular way station for the Butterfield stages to
which ultimately he gave the old home name, Spadra. Going on toward
the city one crossed the Puente Ranch and came to El Monte, which
doesn’t mean anything about mountains, but refers to the thickets of
willow that even today are characteristic of the place. “The Monte” it
used to be called when first it was founded, a little later than San
Bernardino, by people who came in from Texas. Although now this town
retains characteristics that might make it seem of Mexican origin it
was in its beginnings entirely an American settlement. It was chosen
for its good farm lands, and soon its citizens were making a success
raising corn, melons, pumpkins, and hogs, and judging from the records
of early chroniclers, rather strenuous boys who seemed ever ready to
join with Los Angeles in the wild doings that marked those days after
the gold excitement had brought to California multitudes of the bad as
well as of the good.

Anaheim was the next town to be founded, following in 1857, the Los
Angeles of 1781, and the two of 1851, San Bernardino and El Monte.
After that the impulse for the starting of new communities gained
headway, not so fast during the sixties, but the seventies marked
the beginning of many now prosperous places and the booming eighties
brought to birth many a city (some of them still-born).

Anaheim was projected by a group of San Francisco Germans who went
about its making in a characteristically methodical and thrifty way.
So far as I can discover it never went through the agonies of hope
and despair that so often mark the course of utopian schemes for
co-operative settlement.

The method adopted for its beginning was to purchase upward of eleven
hundred acres, send an agent ahead who attended to the clearing
off of the sage and cactus, the division of the land into twenty
acre portions, ten acres of each being set out to vines, and to the
laying out of lots in the center for the necessary shops, school,
post-office, etc. When all was ready the colonists came in a body,
finding everything prepared for them.

Two of the inhabitants of this town at a little later period were of
great renown,--the Polish actress, Madame Helena Modjeska, who made her
home at a neighboring ranch, and Henryk Sienkiewicz, the author of Quo
Vadis, who spent a year or two in Anaheim.

One of the first things that had been done was the development of an
intricate irrigation system, tapping the Santa Ana river for water.
This made an oasis of the colony during the terrible droughts that
came a few years later. The edges of the zanjas had been planted with
willows and cottonwoods and all about the settlement was a palisade
of willow stakes, which, set in the damp soil, speedily sprouted and
formed a leafy barrier to the thousands of desperate, starving cattle,
which but for this defence, would have overrun the one green spot in
all the country round.

Speaking of sprouting willows recalls the story that the first settlers
in El Monte made rough bedsteads in their dirt floored houses from the
native wood and that shortly the posts put forth branches and made of
each bed a bower.

The people of Anaheim were able almost at once to ship grapes to the
San Francisco market, and also were soon making a very good wine for
similar export. They made use of a neighboring small harbor which soon
came to be known as Anaheim Landing. Recently my Aunt Margaret told me
that the first wool that they sent to San Francisco from the Cerritos
went from this place instead of from San Pedro as it did later.

The success of Anaheim led to the founding in following years of other
colonies and towns. Westminster, Santa Ana, Tustin were small centers
to which I occasionally had the privilege of driving with my elders on
business bent.

Downey, named for the popular governor, was nearer by and even in those
days attracted visitors by an agricultural fair. I recall a dusty trip
over there to observe my only namesake, a Holstein bossy, winning a
blue ribbon,--Sally, and her twin brother, who bore the name of my
beloved cousin, Harry.

Compton to me was an established fact but to the ranch dwellers it was
a new Methodist place offering them the conveniences of a nearby post
office, church and physician. How well I remember Dr. Whaley, whose
practices had not been tempered by a breath of homœpathy. When I had
so bad a cold I couldn’t celebrate getting to be seven years old by
the promised picnic at the beach nor wear my bulky new bathing suit
made of heavy navy blue flannel and trimmed with three rows of white
tape, he was called to cure me, which he proceeded to do by swabbing
my throat with thick yellow stuff with iron in it, by giving a black
dose that necessitated the immediate cleaning of my teeth lest it
rot them, and by ordering the application of a strong, large mustard
plaster, first to my front, then to my back, then to each side, thus
making a complete red jacket of burns about my body. Apparently it
cured me. It is strange how popular mustard was in those days, not only
the terrible plasters but the torturing foot baths for colds--boiling
water reinforced by that awful stinging powder that came out of yellow
covered cans bearing the lion and unicorn of old England. I wonder
if doctors and parents applied the cure to themselves as well as to
children.

Compton was the second stop beyond Cerritos on the wonderful railroad
from Wilmington to Los Angeles; the first was Dominguez and the third
was Florence and that was all until one reached Alameda Street, and
the “depot” which was on a corner by a flour mill. What fun it was to
go to the city. We got into the carriage in the court yard, and drove
out through the gates and down the hill to the river, where sometimes
the fording was very exciting,--water might come into the buggy if
it was winter and had been raining a long time; then there were two
separate “willows” to go through, only a half mile ride in all. Either
we were always very prompt or the train was not, for there was time and
permission to put our ears down on the rail to listen for the coming
train, and there was a low trestle over the “slew” where we might walk
the ties.

I was amused to read recently in an old book the boast that Los Angeles
was a railroad center, the focus for four roads! This one that I
knew was the first, twenty-three miles in length; next was the one
to Spadra, longest of all, thirty miles; then one to San Fernando,
reaching out through the grain fields of the valley twenty-two miles
toward San Francisco, and the Anaheim road, twenty-eight miles.
Progress had arrived.

From the beginnings of Los Angeles and San Gabriel, San Pedro was the
port, but for very many years it remained the desolate spot that is
described in “Two Years Before the Mast.” There was one hide house to
which, when a boat came into port, the accumulated stores of hides and
tallow were hauled. These products which the inhabitants exchanged
with Yankee traders for everything they needed or wanted in the way of
manufactured goods, did not require very elaborate facilities, and it
was the custom to roll the bundles over the cliffs to the rocks below
where the sailors must gather them up and carry on their heads out to
their boats. The sailors also must carry over the rough trail to the
top of the bluff the boxes and bales containing their merchandise.
San Pedro was not a popular port. But conditions must have improved
very soon after the visits of Dana, for there is extant a letter from
the Angeleno of Boston origin, Abel Stearns, in which he tells of his
notion to improve the situation. He took up a collection among his
friends, to the amount of one hundred and fifty dollars, secured the
services of some mission Indians and in a few weeks had made the first
road down to water level.

After the admission of California as a state, travel to and from Los
Angeles increased and before long stages between San Pedro and the city
became necessary. Don David Alexander and General Phineas Banning
were the prime movers who developed this. Gen. Banning is one of the
most picturesque figures of the early American period and was very
active in every field of the development of transportation. At one
time he was doing a large business freighting supplies over the Mormon
trail to Salt Lake City and the territory beyond. And he was largely
responsible for the building of that first railway, the San Pedro-Los
Angeles, an improvement which put an end to the exciting stage races
that introduced to their future home both those chroniclers of early
days, Harris Newmark and Horace Bell, wild rides to a wilder community.
People today sometimes deplore a “crime wave,” but to live up to the
proportions set in 1853 Los Angeles should stage about four hundred
murders a day every day in the year, for that year there was an average
of more than one killing a day in a population of about twenty-five
hundred.

It was in 1858, I believe, that Gen. Banning promoted the town New San
Pedro, later naming it for his birthplace in Delaware, Wilmington. Here
he built his home and planted the garden that remains today. I remember
calling there once with my mother and seeing a most lovely little girl
out among the flowers.

During the time of the Civil War the Government established Drum
Barracks in Wilmington, thus adding to its importance, and it was one
of the government warehouses, later abandoned, which was purchased by
the Alamitos Co., taken down, moved the ten miles over to the ranch
and rebuilt, where it can still be seen by motorists passing over the
Anaheim Road, a great red barn with white trimmings.

A forgotten fact about Wilmington is that it was the home of Wilson
College, the gift of Don Benito to the Southern Methodists, and though
short-lived, was the fore-runner of such institutions as the University
of Southern California, Occidental, and Pomona. This college was housed
in two of the buildings of the deserted Drum Barracks.

I have numerous memories of Wilmington, for it was there that my
Uncle John and Aunt Susan set up housekeeping, and lived until they
moved over to the Alamitos. From this port I once took steamer with
my parents for San Francisco, and received one of the most unexpected
experiences of my life, the sudden onset of sea-sickness as the steamer
rounded Point Firmin. I was at dinner with father, enjoying an ear of
corn.

I also remember a Christmas tree at the church from which Santa Claus
handed me a little covered sewing box. This must have been the church
which in its beginnings had so few attendants that there was only
one member who could sing at all, (Aunt Margaret told me), “Prophet”
Potts, and as he knew but one hymn every Sunday the service contained
“Coronation.”

Aunt Margaret used to tell another church story also. Soon after
she first came to Cerritos there was an attempt to organize a
Congregational church in Los Angeles. The community approved, and
although there were but six actual members, the minister and his wife,
the deacon and his wife, Mrs. Mary Scott and Mrs. Jotham Bixby, many
other citizens contributed towards it and a lot was secured on the
west side of New High Street near Temple and a building was put up.
Everything now was complete and the day of dedication approached. The
visiting minister from San Francisco came down by boat to Wilmington
and was met by the Bixbys and taken over to the Cerritos for the
night. The next day they all drove the sixteen miles to the city to
go to church. Aunt Margaret noticed a certain constraint in the air
and a black eye on the minister. After service she discovered that
the afternoon before the minister and the deacon had gotten into a
fist fight in the furniture store over a red carpet for the church
that the deacon had purchased without authority. Poor minister, he was
red-headed. He was so mortified that he resigned and the little church
went into a period of inanition. Sometime later the present First
Congregational Church was organized and the firster one gave it the
church property plus the debt for the red carpet. And I think the debt
still existed when I began attending that Sunday School several years
later. It was during the interval of non-activity that the Wilmington
church was organized and the Cerritos people wended their way thither
on Sundays until the Methodist church in Compton, much nearer home, was
organized.

The road to Wilmington from the Cerritos Ranch went southwest over the
mesa and down across bottom lands where corn grew amazingly, so tall
that a man could stand on the seat of the spring wagon and not be able
to see over the tops of the waving stalks.

And Long Beach? There was none. Where it now stands was a grain field
and its only buildings were a shed for the horses during threshing
times, and the small house occupied during the grain season by
Archibald Borden and his four sons from Downey who raised wheat and
barley on shares. After the harvest the Bixby sheep were turned in upon
the stubble fields.

People were coming into Southern California more and more, especially
after rail connection with San Francisco came in 1877. The chorus of
rapturous praise singers was swelling, and enterprising people began
plotting new settlements. The time for the subdividing of the large
holdings came on apace.

I tramped over the level lands on the north end of the ranch, trailing
the surveyors who were marking off the acres that were going to the
making of Clearwater, and saw it severed from the ranch without a
pang, but when Harry and I learned about Mr. Willmore and the American
Colony, who wanted Cerritos (Signal) Hill and the bluff and our beach
we resented it greatly. There was a seaside town at Santa Monica,--what
need of disturbing things as they were for the sake of another? Why
should conditions that we had always known, that were as much a part
of living as day and night be rudely changed? But the grief of a
little boy and little girl could not stay the march of the world and
soon we were insulted by fences and gates where before we had ridden
unchecked. It wasn’t so very long, however, before we became resigned
to the town that had first called itself Willmore City and then Long
Beach, though we did think it might have kept its own old name,
Cerritos Beach. We liked the new hotel bath house which made dressing
for a swim much easier than when we had had to run far down the beach
to find a projection of bluff large enough to provide modest shelter.
And we didn’t mind the Methodist Tabernacle with its summer Chautauqua,
or the little shop where we could buy fruit, for we seemed to be
getting over being children almost as fast as the new town was growing.

But whatever changes have come there has always been the sky, sunny
or starry, or hidden by fog or passing cloud; the same mountains with
their wonder of changing color guarded the valley. The old carpet
of gorgeous wild flowers is gone; cities creep over the plain and a
network of roads covers the earth; there is scarcely a place where
one cannot see against the sky the fretted tower that means oil. One
beauty goes and perhaps another comes for those who have eyes to
see,--especially if they have a fair sized blind spot, which I find
sometimes is a most satisfying possession.

The “old timers” wore just as powerful magnifying glasses when they
looked at the future as do certain boosters today. They saw the
possibilities of the development of this Southern California and
prophesied in the face of vacant fields and an unprotected harbor all
the things that have come to pass, and more. It would be pleasant to
know that Heaven afforded peep-holes in its walls through which these
dreamers might look down to see what is now happening to their adored
“land of sunshine.” I am sure that Admiral Henry Knox Thatcher, who
commanded the Pacific Squadron from 1866 to 1868, says “I told you so,”
to grandfather when they meet on some golden street corner. Wouldn’t
you, if you had written this letter to him in the old days on earth?

  Nahant, Mass.
  Sept. 25th, 1879.

  My dear friend Hathaway,

  ... During my various visits do the port of San Pedro I observed the
  facility with which that Bay could be made a perfectly secure harbor
  for ships in all weather by simply building a mole of stone with
  which the shore is lined for miles. And then blasting “Dead Man’s
  Island” close at hand for the foundation of said mole and using the
  millions of tons of smaller rocks to be found all along shore for
  the filling in. At present the anchorage of S. P. is perfectly safe
  so long as the wind remains north,--but when from the south no ship
  could escape destruction at that anchorage unless supplied with steam
  power. I foresaw that San Francisco would strongly oppose any attempt
  to make S. P. a port of entry because it would deprive them of the
  power of plundering that fair and fertile portion of California as
  they now do. And all the products of that (best) portion of the
  state must now be carried at great cost to the only exporting custom
  house, S. F., whereas if they could be shipped directly from S. P.
  the producers would save tens of thousands annually even now. But now
  is as nothing, for the day is not far distant when Los Angeles and
  adjoining counties will become the greatest producing counties on the
  face of the globe; everything points to it, a soil of unsurpassed
  fertility, and a climate as perfect as is to be found upon earth. It
  is but for the people themselves to wake up and _insist_ upon aid
  from government in accomplishing this noble work. With my feeble
  efforts I did what I could to bring this about during my command of
  the Pacific Squadron and secured the aid of the Republican member of
  Congress from C. to induce Govm’t. to send out an able engineer to
  survey the Port of S. P. with this object in view. I wrote articles
  for the S. F. newspapers and had hopes of success but my term of
  command expired and my successor felt no interest in the matter and
  the few producers at that time appeared quite indifferent except Mr.
  Banning of Wilmington, who seemed to be a man of enlarged views and
  was then in public life and exerting considerable influence. But I
  think the S. F. element was too strong for him to contend with. Yet
  I am satisfied that this scheme will one day be accomplished, though
  I may not live to see it. I felt at the time not a little sorry that
  friend Jotham (who was as deeply interested as any) did not take more
  thought on the subject of building up that lovely country; of course
  the R. R. will aid in developing that lower section of California
  but it will be found a very expensive mode of transportation compared
  with the floating process. These are all crude ideas of mine you will
  say perhaps, but they have taken firm possession of my mind and will
  hardly be eradicated....

  Affectionate friend, H. K. Thatcher.

It is interesting to note that the prediction in this letter that
the country about Los Angeles would become the greatest producing
country in the world has been fulfilled so far as the United States is
concerned, for in the 1920 Census it is ranked first in agricultural
production. The present development of San Pedro Harbor, now generally
called Los Angeles Harbor, reads like a fairy story.

Admiral Thatcher was the grandson of Gen. Henry Knox, Washington’s
first Secretary of War. The period of his command of the Pacific
Squadron was from 1866 to 1868. Before the time of the writing of the
letter quoted work was begun and a considerable break-water built,
following in general the lines he had suggested.




CHAPTER XIII SCHOOL DAYS


My education began the day I was born, for I am told that, after a
somewhat precipitous and unceremonious arrival, my father took me
about the room to see the pictures on the wall--sundry chromos and
steel engravings, which I am said to have observed with intelligence
and pleasure. Having been intimately acquainted with several normal
infants, I doubt, however, both observation and pleasure. Perhaps that
early exposure to art was what determined my life-long interest in
it, and in the joys of seeing. Those old-fashioned pictures may have
presented to my inexperienced eye no more confused an image than do the
latest post-impressionist interpretations of essential form or the soul
of things to my trained sight.

After this introduction to the graphic arts I met poetry--familiar
hymns and Mother Goose. I knew the ten little Indians who by a series
of gruesome accidents were reduced to none, Prudy, Sanford and Merton
whom I loathed, Pocahontas and Robinson Crusoe. I still possess a
number of books that date far back in my life, among them Mary Mapes
Dodge’s _Rhymes and Jingles_ and Whittier’s _Child Life_. The only
things my father ever read aloud to me were poems, usually out of the
big green and gold _Household Book of Poetry_. Aunt Martha read us
_Helen’s Babies_, to my delight.

I was reading at four. I have “Rewards of Merit,” small cards with gay
pictures given me at the end of each week when I had been a good little
girl and made proper progress in my reading lessons. And for my fifth
birthday my father printed in red ink a foolscap sheet of words for me
to learn to spell, five columns beginning with words of two letters and
running up to six letters each. I must have been greatly pleased with
my present for I remember it yet so happily. A letter written by my
mother at this time says that I was insatiable in my demand for stories
to be told to me and for books to be read.

My first school was a private one in First Street between Spring and
Main in Los Angeles after I was seven. I remember very little about
it. My career there was ended by the long sickness when father told me
about his early trips to California. The next school was supposed to be
very select, Miss Carle’s, over on Olive Street near Second in the same
house with Miss Stem, my Adventist music teacher, who used to tell me
the world was about to end, but who could give no satisfactory answer
to my contention that in that case I ought to be having harp lessons
instead of piano. The school numbered ten children and was conducted in
Miss Carle’s bedroom, apparently, for in one corner stood a marvellous,
high feather-bed; once when I carelessly stood on a chair to reach the
top of the black-board, she in anger tossed me across the room to this
bed, where I disappeared in its feathery depths. Having acquired a
little knowledge and considerable whooping-cough, this school was also
consigned to my past.

The Los Angeles Academy on Main Street, between Third and Fourth, was
my next educational resort. This was on the lot adjoining the famous
old round-house, or better, fourteen-sided house,--each of whose sides
was labelled with the name of one of the thirteen original states and
California. It had been for many years a popular resort and beer garden
called “The Garden of Eden.” But its days of glory were past, and the
marble Adam and Eve who had adorned it were gone; no flaming sword was
visible, but there was a formidable cactus hedge on the Spring Street
side which may have deterred them from return. There was vacant land
on the east side of Main Street opposite the school, where one of the
city zanjas ran beside a row of willows at the foot of a little hill.
Playing here one noon I attempted to wade and was unceremoniously swept
from my feet and sent sailing down the flume. I suppose I learned
something at this school, but I know that I have always suffered from
lack of drill in plain addition and subtraction, so I think I shall
have to blame the Los Angeles Academy for hampering me in calculus and
other of the higher reaches of mathematics.

When I was ten I was somewhat desperately and gingerly consigned to the
public schools, where I would much better have been from the beginning.
I started in the fifth grade under Mrs. Ella Enderlein, later a
newspaper woman well known in the city. I had the good fortune to
have both sixth and seventh grade work with Mrs. C. G. Du Bois, a rare
teacher, who remained in the school system for many, many years, and
will be lovingly remembered by numerous men and women of Los Angeles
who were also once the boys and girls of this city. When I knew her
she wore six little grey curls hanging at the back of her head, and
she had the merriest blue eyes,--we learned our lessons well for her.
There was a strange principal who used to walk about the halls arrayed
like Solomon in all his glory. He wore slippers and a dressing gown of
oriental patterns and coloring, trimmed with a sapphire blue. Perhaps
his style of dress had something to do with his disappearance from our
view. His successor was an excellent teacher, I know, for he taught
me in the eighth grade; however he had a bad temper and once threw an
eraser at one of the girls and chased a boy up and down the aisles and
over our desks in a vain attempt to thrash him.

Mrs. Bradfield was art teacher for all the schools in the city and gave
me my first lessons. As I had something of a gift for drawing I was
allowed on all possible public occasions to decorate the blackboards
with colored chalk pictures and designs, often Kate Greenaway children,
or sun-flowers after Oscar Wilde.

My four years of grammar school were passed in the first high school
building, located on Pound Cake Hill, about where the upper story of
the County Court House now is. When the site was wanted by the men-folk
of the town, the school building was moved on a mighty trestle across
Temple Street and over to California Street and the hill itself was
decapitated.

When I was ready for high school I went down to the new grammar school
building at Sixth Street which occupied the Mercantile Place property
between Spring and Broadway. I daily walked along a Broadway of
cottages and gardens and occasional churches. Often I picked a flower
or a Chinese orange from Aunt Margaret’s yard at Second Street; and, as
I passed, I looked down the lovely Third Street, shaded by large pepper
trees, to a cottage covered by an enormous rose bush.

The Los Angeles High School was temporarily accommodated in four rooms
and an office, while the new building up next the old graveyard on
North Hill Street, was being constructed. It is said that for several
years the high school children ate their noon lunches sitting on
tombs and cemetery curbs. In my day there were fewer than two hundred
students. The course was not unlike the simpler ones of today, but
there were not so many electives and none of the manual and technical
classes. In the ninth grade I had Latin, Rhetoric, Algebra, Physical
Geography, and Ancient History; and in the tenth, Latin, Geometry,
English and English History,--not so very different from the present
college preparatory, is it?

Mrs. Bradfield taught drawing in the high school as well as in the
grades. It was under her that Guy Rose got his first art lessons. Music
also had a special teacher and under Prof. Kent we sang lustily--among
other things “We are the gay students of fair Salamanca.” His high silk
hat, his close fitting Prince Albert coat, his waxed moustache, his
smile, and tripping steps were very entertaining to the children.

At this time it was determined to send me north to school for a change
of climate. Oakland at that time was a center of private schools and
academies. I went to Field Seminary, long since extinct. The life
in a well-governed boarding school was something new to me. I, who
had ranged freely, must take my daily exercise in a regulated walk,
the girls going two by two up and down the city streets. It was
surprising how soon this habit affected my point of view. Once, after
due deliberation and considering of my record, recommendations, and
pedigree, I was allowed to walk alone around the corner--no street was
to be crossed--to take dinner with my cousins, the Ben Flint family.
It is a wonder I did not crawl through the paling fence where the back
yards met, for such was the effect of the constant mass movements that
when I stepped alone out of the gate into the peaceful street I felt
as embarrassed as if I had shed my garments, along with the protecting
phalanx of pupils and guarding teacher.

On Thursdays I was excused from exercise to take a bath. The rule of
the clock was rigid, and when it said four o’clock on Thursday I must
be ready to enter and bathe, or go forever unbathed. What a smashing of
precedent! But I suppose one tub could not accommodate over forty girls
on Saturday night, the correct American bath night.

The actual school work was a delight, with glimpses into new fields:
chemistry, where we saw samples of aluminum, a metal which might some
day become very useful; geology, with a long trip on the street car
miles and miles into the country to the State University at Berkeley,
where Professor Le Conte told us most interesting things--geology,
gently tuned by Professor Thomas Heaton to meet the exigencies of
Mosaic “days of creation,” and yet opening the mind to questionings.
There was also Cicero and an introduction into the German language and
English literature. I even read the whole of _Paradise Lost_. Then, bad
eyes, and a verdict of never any more school, not even sight enough for
sewing! But oculists don’t know everything always.

And so I came home. In the house were many books,--always had been
so long as I could remember. The rigid Maine rule of semi-annual
house-cleaning held sway, and it was often my task to take out, beat,
dust and replace all the volumes in the capacious bookcases. There were
essays, histories, biographies: sets of Dickens, Thackeray, George
Eliot, Hawthorne, Scott, besides scattered novels; Shakespeare was
there and a few other dramatists, all the standard poets, Cervantes
and Plutarch. These were not only dusted, but read to a great or less
extent.

_Harper’s Magazine_, with its buff cover adorned with cupids,
cornucopias, fruits and flowers, was a regular visitor, as was the
_Century_ later. I recall the laughter of a family reading of Frank
Stockton’s _The Casting Away of Mrs. Lecks and Mrs. Aleshine_. _The
Congregationalist_ and _The Pacific_ provided Sunday reading for
father, along with his Bagster’s _Bible_. He once pointed out to me
mildly that the varying accounts of the Hebrew historical events did
not “jibe.” Several missionary magazines gave knowledge of life in far
parts of the world. _Littell’s Living Age_ came for several years, and,
being bound, was at least handled semi-annually.

The tri-weekly _New York Tribune_ and _Harper’s Weekly_ (until it
turned mug-wump) brought news out of the East to supplement what two
daily papers afforded. I think father knew where every raw material in
the world was produced and where it was manufactured. He used to “poke
fun” at me as an educated woman, after I returned from college, because
I could not name, characterize and assign to his state every United
States Senator.

I had the advantage of a home where good English was spoken, where one
was expected to know how to spell correctly and write grammatically,
where an interest was taken in large and wide questions, and where
everyone found his chief pleasure and amusement in reading. Rather a
bad environment in which to find oneself condemned to useless eyes!

Los Angeles did not in those days offer, naturally, the same
opportunities in art, theater, and music that the East did, but I saw
Booth and Barrett in _Julius Caesar_ and I heard Adelina Patti.

When my aunt came to our home she brought with her about a hundred
photographic copies of the world’s famous paintings and pictures of
cathedrals and statuary. On many a Sunday afternoon I pored over these
until the names of Ralphael, da Vinci, Murillo, Phidias became as
familiar as Longfellow or Scott.

As was customary, a faithful attempt extending over many years, was
made to make a musician out of me. It failed. I was eye-minded. That
exposure to art on my natal day had determined my tastes.

Vacations, the most welcome part of the school year, were spent, with
the exception of one summer in the East, for the most part at the
Cerritos. As the resort grew at Long Beach and we young folks attained
age we passed many hours on the sand and in the breakers. Then, when I
was eighteen, I had my first experience of camp life at Avalon, just
established at Catalina. I learned to swim and dive, to tramp and sleep
on the ground. For three summers we did this while the island was yet
primitive and uncrowded.




CHAPTER XIV PIONEERING AT POMONA COLLEGE


“It must be a college of the New England type--just where and how it is
to be started is the question,” said one of the men who, one evening in
the middle eighties, were discussing with my father and grandfather the
possibility and need of a good college in Southern California, one of
high standards of character and scholarship. There was no question of
necessity--only of ways and means. The boys and girls must be given the
same type of education as that offered in the far away homeland.

Southern California was booming, and hearts and hopes were high. It
was a bold undertaking for the small group of Congregationalists, but
with faith and hard work and time it could be done--the founding of
a college, “Christian, but not sectarian, for both sexes,” a slogan
from the first. Later the hopes and dreams of the few crystalized into
action and the word came home that a committee had been appointed to
find a location.

After much jaunting, even so far as Banning, on the east, the choice
fell upon Piedmont, a sightly mesa north of Pomona, a little town that
had recently been growing up some forty miles east of Los Angeles; and
until a permanent name could be decided upon (possibly that of some
devoted donor) the venture was to be named “The Pomona College.” This
name was not finally accepted for some twenty years.

From time to time I heard of the progress of the undertaking. Father’s
cousin, Nathan Blanchard, who had been disappointed in his boyhood
ambition for a college education in Maine, was much concerned in this
project for providing opportunity for the young people of his later
state. He became one of the first trustees, and continued on the
board and was vitally interested so long as he lived. It was to his
generosity that the college owes its beautiful acreage of oaks and
native growth, Blanchard Park.

Rev. Charles B. Sumner, the minister of the Pomona Congregational
church, had secured a young man, Frank Brackett, recently graduated
from Dartmouth to open a private school in Pomona. It met in the
church parlor. Mr. Sumner’s son and daughter and a few others
needed a chance to prepare for college. After about six months the
authorities of the new college took over this school as a preparatory
department--teachers, students, and all.

In the meantime, plans for a permanent building were maturing, and amid
hopes and prayers, joy and a certain trepidation, the corner stone was
laid on the beautiful heights at the mouth of Live Oak Cañon, close to
the mountains, with a wide outlook over the valley.

When plans for the college first took form, Southern California was
full of hope and enthusiasm--those were the boom days. Men were making
fortunes over night, and the generosity of many hearts promised
sufficient support for the college. But the point of saturation in land
speculation was reached and a panic was precipitated and the new-born
enterprise faced disaster. Then began years of self-denial, struggle,
devotion, visions that have resulted in the college known today. Many a
time it was a very serious question whether or not the breath of life
could be kept in the baby.

About the time I came home from Field Seminary, condemned to no more
school, the young institution was offered the empty hotel in the
unsuccessful boom town of Claremont, together with certain lots staked
out about it. The trustees decided to accept the gift, planning to use
this site ultimately for the preparatory work only, and to go on with
its college buildings at Piedmont as originally intended.

The following June the school introduced itself with closing exercises,
oral examinations, etc. Grandfather was among the guests. Although he
was now over eighty, he spent much of every day with books, reading
constantly his Greek or Latin, or solving mathematical problems for
sheer joy in it. He was delighted by an oral examination in Greek given
by a Mr. Norton, the new head of the school. One boy especially pleased
him by showing evidence of good teaching and by the gusto with which
he translated his Homer. He “believed the boy was the son of Deacon
Barrows of the Ojai.” Perhaps this same boy’s enthusiasm for the war
exploits of Homer is responsible for the military fervor of the man.

So when I decided that my eyes, fortified by glasses, were not yet
gone, and that I must go to school again, grandfather suggested that
I try the new one at Pomona. “Of course it is pioneering, but seems
genuine and worth trying,” he said. Consequently, on a hot August day,
Aunt Martha and I went forth to investigate, and, perhaps beginning a
long line of the mistaken, sought Pomona College in Pomona.

After some delay we found a man with an express wagon who took us to
Claremont, an hour’s drive under a scorching noonday sun. We soon left
the little settlement, passed the apricot and peach orchards that have
since been replaced by oranges, and struck off in a diagonal through
virgin land to the large building, gabled and turreted, standing alone
in the distance. As we came nearer we discovered that there was more
town than we had realized. The same Santa Fe station that is now in use
was in its place--would that we had arrived there instead of at the
Southern Pacific in Pomona!

On the sandy road, now Yale Avenue, there was one store, which
contained the post office,--a primitive department store kept by Mr.
Urbanus, whose name was the only suggestion of a city in the region. A
little farther up the road was a spare, white, box of a house, which
has since grown porches and a garden, where we found the principal of
the school, Mr. Norton, with his wife and baby girl, Katharine. To
the east was Mr. Biely’s barn; to the west Colonel W. H. Holabird’s
two-storied house; and two or three other small empty houses peeked
over the top of the brush. On the outskirts rose an imposing red and
yellow towered and ornamented school house, waiting for the children
of the visioned city to materialize. Some twenty years later it was
supplanted by the present attractive grammar school, moved across the
street, and, with form and color made more modest, given over to the
use of the city fathers.

The ex-hotel belonged to the same architectural period as the Del Monte
at Monterey or the Coronado at San Diego, but naturally it was of
lesser glory.

Such was Claremont in 1889; no streets, no walks, just a few spots
reclaimed from the desert, connected by trails or sandy roads; all the
rest sage, cactus, stones, an occasional oak or sycamore; but the same
ever-beautiful and mysterious mountains stood guard, the same sunny
skies and fragrant air gave charm. Rabbits scuttled between the bushes,
lizards and horned toads enjoyed the climate, rattlesnakes found a
peaceful home, and at night coyotes ranged and sang.

A little clearing had been made about the aforetime hotel now devoted
to the incipient college, and vines and trees had been planted but
as yet they had not made sufficient growth to be noticeable. The oak
tree that now stands in the center of College Avenue was then in its
native state in the midst of the brush. The building with its meager
furnishing had stood empty all summer and accumulated dust added to
its dreariness. However the plan of work offered me was attractive
and, much to the surprise of my aunt, I decided to enter in the
fall, thus beginning the procession of children, grandchildren,
great-grandchildren of the old scholar who from that day to this have
been connected with the college.

In September the third member of the so-called “old faculty,” Miss
Spalding, arrived. She was destined to develop the English department,
but this year filled in, teaching Latin, German, spelling and
composition, and how many other subjects I do not know.

All the activities of the school were in the one building. The large
parlor with the circular window was chapel and assembly room. The room
occupied in recent years by the Dean of Women was study hall for the
younger students; Prof. Norton had a small classroom on the east side,
Miss Spalding had half the dining room roughly partitioned off, and
Prof. Brackett dispensed mathematics and physics over the bar in the
hotel bar-room. He dispensed the physics so successfully that I was
able three years later in Wellesley college to rely once or twice on
Claremont knowledge to carry me through a physics lesson otherwise
unprepared.

The Hall housed all the resident members of the school except Mr.
Norton’s family. Mr. Brackett and his bride were on the first floor;
and upstairs, divided by a partition, pervious to sounds and notes, if
not to persons, were the men’s and women’s dormitories--eleven boys in
the former, four girls and two teachers in the latter. Here also roomed
Miss Roe, sister of E. P. Roe of _Chestnut Burr_ fame, a forerunner of
the easterners who now make Claremont their winter home.

At this time there were about sixty students in the school, only one of
them, Helen Sumner, being of college rank. In the senior preparatory
class which I joined, there were about a dozen. They formed the unique
class that for seven years was the most advanced in the school--think
how dangerous to heads the experience of being seniors for seven years!
This class graduated from Pomona college in 1894 and numbered among its
members Dr. George Sumner and Dr. David P. Barrows.

The year I joined them I found each member of the class had read Caesar
during the summer vacation, taking examination and passing in September
in order that the class might go on with the required amount of Cicero
in the first semester and Vergil in the second, and so make college
the next fall, with four years of Latin done, and done thoroughly in
two years. With Vergil at nine in the morning (after submitting to
ten minutes of spelling drill on any word Miss Spalding might find in
Dr. Johnson’s _Rasselas_), and again at four in the afternoon we read
rapidly enough to get the charm of the poem as well as the dry bones of
vocabulary and construction. All the work of the year was strenuous but
full of delight--the happiest year of all my school life.

The primitive conditions of a pioneer school only added zest to the
students, but for those teachers who had come out of the East the
barn-like hotel in the desert, the lack of comforts and conveniences,
even of sufficient food, and the meager salaries possible meant
hardship.

One of the institutions of our day was the bus which met students from
Pomona who came to North Pomona on the “dummy,” which I recognized
as the discarded, first means of transportation between Long Beach
and the outside world. Down there it had been known as the G. O. P.,
“Get Out and Push,” because frequently the male passengers had to
dismount and help propel it when it hesitated in its progress from
Thenard, the junction on the main S. P. line near Wilmington, to the
little camp-meeting settlement on the bluff, Long Beach. When it was
superseded there it evidently had been transferred to the remote
service between Pomona and the new Santa Fe railroad to the north of
the town.

The bus was very rickety, two long seats whose cushions sprouted
excelsior, a somewhat tremulous canopy top, a rear step that swung
loose so that it required great skill to mount, especially since there
was a hole in the floor where one would naturally place one’s foot in
entering. It must have been a gift bus, into whose mouth one must not
look enquiringly.

Bret Harte, a high, bony, bay horse, and Amos Obediah Jonah Micah, a
roly-poly squat sorrel were the mis-mated pair who provided locomotion.
I was once told that the bones of one of these horses is preserved in
the college museum, but an after thought on the part of the informer,
suggested that the historic skeleton might have upheld one of the
steeds celebrated a year or two later,--Bismarck or Gladstone or
Mephistopheles. Speaking of the latter reminds me of a story once
current in Claremont concerning a conversation between the heads of
the Latin and Greek departments. “I can make a pun on any word you will
propose,” said Professor Colcord. “How about the name of my horse?”
replied Professor Norton. Quick as a wink came the response, “If I had
him here I could hit him with me-fist-awful-easy.”

My year in Claremont was an unusually rainy one, and for a time all the
lower part of town was under water from outbreaking springs. It was
welcomed by John McCall, the boy who drove the bus, as a providential
means of extending the usefulness of the public conveyance. Every night
he took the bus to the point now called the corner of Second Street and
Alexander Avenue, unhitched Bret and Amos, and left it standing in the
water all night, so that the rims of the wheels might swell enough to
retain the tires the next day.

On Sundays the bus must forego its day of rest in order to take
Claremont to Pomona to church, the former town not yet having a church
of its own. We enlivened the long, slow drive home, more than an hour
in our slow-going chariot, with calling up memories of all the good
things to eat we had ever known or imagined. We were none too well fed
at best and Sunday dinner came late. It is certain that we did not
suffer from over-feeding, but, on the other hand, I suppose our minds
were all the clearer for our restrained diet.

This was the time of the beginning of things. The Pomona College
Literary Society--high sounding name--had begun its career. Debates,
papers, three-minute ex-tempore speeches were taken seriously. One
gala day in spring we turned to Mother Goose and treated her works
in the same manner in which we had been handling Shakespeare. One
number on the program was a debate on “Was the mother justified in
whipping Jill on the occasion when she and Jack went for water?” I
remember it well for I defended Jill in opposition to David Barrows.
It was the first time that either of us had delivered a speech without
notes. Unfortunately, I lost--but who could expect to win against the
eloquence and, I maintained at the time, the sophistry of an embryo
University President? However, it was a split verdict and one of the
judges resisted his plausible arguments and gave credit to the weight
of my feminine defense of poor Jill. (Thank you, Dr. Sumner!) The
debate was great fun.

This year the college paper was born, and christened the _Pomona
Student_. It was a monthly, and, considering that it was conducted by
preparatory students, compares very well with its later representative,
even if I, who was its maid-of-all-work, do say so.

There was a music department, with Miss Stella Fitch as teacher. During
the next few years music became quite a feature, and its quality is
recalled with pleasure and regret in these days of prevailing jazz.

As for Athletics, tennis and baseball had arrived, but no football or
track work. Several students had their own saddle horses and one or two
could be hired. A happy memory is of a spring day, a ride through the
fragrant sagebrush, a running race down Ontario’s long street,--a good
time even if I did wear a long black habit and ride a sidesaddle.

On the first Mountain Day we went to Live Oak Cañon--perhaps thirty of
us. We led the outdoor life that has always been so large a part of
Pomona College attractiveness. I wonder if any one since my day, after
a picnic in the Wash, enjoyed an afternoon of sledding. Four of us,
naturally two boys and two girls, once topped off a “steak-feed” by
sliding down the short, grassy slope of the knoll, south of the present
Greek Theater, with a frying pan and an iron baker for our sleds.

The heating arrangements in the Hall were primitive, so that a minor
object of every walk was to collect combustible material. I’m afraid
that a good many corner lot stakes went up in our smoke. The little
stoves were amusing. As I remember them, they seem about six inches
square, by twelve long, but I suppose they really must have been at
least ten by fifteen. One day I went in under the Hall in search of
chips left from the building, but meeting there two cunning little
black and white wood-pussies, I quickly and silently retreated, lest
they should consider me a poacher on their preserves and protest.

The college library at that time occupied partially half a dozen
shelves in an alcove. Miss Spalding, who had brought two hundred books
with her out of the East as a nucleus for the library was in charge,
and in the spring term inspired us to see how much we could earn for
its benefit. Soon all sorts of enterprises were under way. Our dining
table instituted a system of penny fines for tardiness or slang. I was
book-keeper and still hold the record. Individuals offered their wares
or talents for the fund. In the April number of the _Student_ I find
various advertisements: “We sadly look at our tattered garments, but
suddenly our faces light up, for we remember that Miss Metkiff darns
at 1 cent per square inch.” “R. S. Day Jr., famous tonsorial artist.
Hair cut, fifteen cents; shave, ten cents. Bangs cut and curled, ten
cents; long hair shampooed twenty-five cents; short hair, ten cents.”
Attractive rates offered by the first Claremont barber, you must admit.

I, who owned one of the original kodaks, taking pictures about the
size of a butter plate, made one very successful photograph. Rev. E.
S. Williams, a visitor at the college, volunteered to give Bancroft’s
_History of the United States_ to the infant library in exchange for a
picture of the Student Body. Our labors netted much fun, the history,
and about thirty dollars.

Excitement grew as Commencement approached, for a class of eleven was
ready for college and in September the actual work of college grade
would begin. Although the closing exercises were made much of, and
guests came from all over Southern California, we youngsters were never
allowed to forget that we were merely “preps,” and, lest we should
imagine ourselves of too much importance, no diplomas were allowed us.
We were told by Mr. Norton that we were “nothing but kids.” To remedy
this lack of evidence of our graduation, two of us picked out, finger
by finger, on the only typewriter in town, diplomas modeled on an
Amherst one, in which we granted ourselves the degree of “Haedi (kids)
in Artibus.” These we distributed at our class supper, served in Mr.
Brackett’s bar room. On this occasion our class prophet established her
claim to be a seer for she said, speaking of David Barrows:

“What are you, priest, poet or philosopher?”

“I am in the P’s at any rate,--purveyor.”

“Of mental merchandise,” said his sister.

“Allow me,” said a merry voice at my elbow, “to introduce Mr. Barrows,
H.A., B.A., M.A., D.D., LL.D., Ph.D., president of ... college, the
leader of young shoots in the way they should go.”

Perhaps Vere Metkiff was a suggestor rather than a seer, and it may
have been this prophecy that set the boy in the path to the presidency
of the University of California. I observe, however, that he is still
minus the proposed degree of D.D.

The next day a boy and girl sat all day on the stairs of Claremont Hall
and crammed Roman History out of two brick-red primers, and in the
afternoon took two college entrance examinations, to meet necessary
requirements. And they both passed. And perhaps they know as much Roman
History now as if they had spent months instead of hours in its study.

And so the year ended, and I left to go east to college as had been
planned for me so long as I could remember. But had there not been
stiffer backbones than mine at home, I think I would have been a member
of that first class at Pomona.

My friends did not forget me, and twice I hurried home from Wellesley
to go into camp with them up in San Antonio Cañon, two wonderful
experiences. Our party of twenty-six was the first of any size to go
beyond Hogsback. We had to go to its base by wagon, and then over the
trail, walking on up to the mouth of Bear Cañon where we stayed for ten
days. From here a dozen of us made the ascent of the peak, ten-thousand
feet high. Six of us stayed the night to see the wonder of the sun
coming up out of the desert,--one of the rare memories of my life.

The three teachers, Prof. Brackett, Dr. Norton, and Dr. Spalding,
whom I knew in that long ago day of the beginning of things, have all
these years been giving of their strength and knowledge. And Dr. C.
B. Sumner, who dreamed and planned and worked for the college, lives
to see it established and prosper, its bare, single building grown to
the beautiful campus and many buildings of the present, its student
body increased more than ten fold, while his son, the youngest of that
famous class, has for years been a valued and loved professor in the
strong and growing college of today.




CHAPTER XV CONCLUSION


The first shovelful of earth was turned for Wellesley College the day
before I was born, and when I was ready to enter as a student, only
eleven classes had been graduated. Yet to me, coming as I did, from
the embryonic, frontier college, with its single building in a waste
of cactus and sagebrush, Wellesley, with its many dignified buildings
set beside Lake Waban in a campus of sweeping lawns and stately trees,
seemed an institution not only honorable, but ancient. Because of my
three earlier visits in the East, the conditions of climate and of
village life were not unknown to me, but it was the four continuous
college years spent in the environment to which my race was wont, and
to which my instinct responded, that brought me my heritage of joy in
the slipping seasons, and made possible an understanding reading of the
songs of our English tongue from “Sumer is icumen in” to “When lilacs
last in the door yard bloomed.”

Wellesley’s hills and meadows, her trees, her birds, her lake brought
me an ecstasy that lingers; her out-of-doors became an integral part of
me, stored pictures of the wide whiteness of winter, with snow-laden
firs or interlacing crystal branches, or of an autumn sunset sky,
glorious behind a black screen of naked trees; memories of hepaticas
and snowdrops in early spring, of anemones and crow-foot violets; of
a mist of new pale leaves on the elms and red buds on the maples; of
lushness of green June, and waxen lilies on summer streams, a greenness
and wetness unlike my land at home, unlike my California with its wide
skies and open miles, its great mountains, its grays and tans, its far
blues and wistful purples. It is blessed I am to know two homes.

Time in its passing brought me to college, not to the one which I
had been destined from birth, Mt. Holyoke, but to Wellesley. The
former had not then transformed itself from a female seminary into a
woman’s college, so, since the value of a degree for women had become
increasingly apparent, it was deemed wise for the girl going three
thousand miles to school to go to the institution of the higher rank.
Neither Berkeley nor Stanford University, though near home, had been
considered. The State University was of necessity non-religious and
hence somewhat suspect of the orthodox, and Stanford was new and
untried--and besides--didn’t it derive its support from race horses
and a winery? Moreover, New England parentage and tradition sent the
children “home,” if possible, for their education.

With Mt. Holyoke eliminated, the choice lay between Smith and
Wellesley, and fell upon the latter for the following reasons:

In the first place, Wellesley was reputed to be modeled on the beloved
school of Mary Lyon, and to have preserved some of its best features.
In the second place--the location near Boston gave it an advantage
over its sister inland college in the way of music, art, libraries,
museums. It was also, by virtue of its situation, more accessible to
visitors, and many a notable person, drawn by the glamour that still
lingered about a woman’s college, came to inspect the materialization
of Tennyson’s vision of _The Princess_. The inspection of visitors and
girls was mutual, and, we hope, of advantage to both. In the third
place, and this is what finally decided me, I preferred the course of
study.

I entered college on certificate, covering the work I had done in three
schools, the Los Angeles High School, Field Seminary in Oakland, and
Pomona College Preparatory School in Claremont. So far as I can judge,
my western preparation was as effective as that of my classmates who
came from the East and the Middle-West.

College life is broken by vacations. I was fortunate in being able to
return to my home for the long summers, while seeing various parts of
the East during the shorter recesses. With great delight each June I
left Massachusetts, beautiful to look upon, intolerable to live in,
going to California’s comfortable southwest coast. I was always sped
on my way by the pities of my friends who ignorantly supposed that
California climate was so much warmer than the eastern in summer as it
is in winter. I doubt if any of my friends were so cool as I.

The eight trips back and forth across the continent gave opportunity
to see many different places. One journey by the Canadian Pacific gave
glimpses of the old city of Montreal, of the lovely land north of
Lake Superior and of the grandeur of the great northern Rockies. On
another trip a stop-over in Chicago gave me ten days at the Columbian
Exposition, whose chief memory is of the dignified white buildings, the
art collection, and the lighted lagoons at night.

My shorter vacations included one each in Chicago, Boston, New York
City, and Washington, where I had the privilege of seeing how actual
sessions of Congress compared with our college representations.
I discovered that we at college had neglected some of the stage
furniture--the couches upon which exhausted congressmen took their
daily siesta.

Twice I spent Christmas in Skowhegan, Maine, my mother’s old home town
to which she had taken me in my little girl days. Here I found deep
snows and a temperature forty degrees below, and in my hostess the
truest embodiment of the Christmas spirit I have ever met.

A Christmas vacation spent in Boston was one of the most interesting.
A friend and I took a room high up in an old house near Copley
Square--two girls free to enjoy the city. Among other delights we had
a feast of music--the Haydn and Handel Society _Messiah_, a recital
given by Paderewski, the new Polish pianist, two symphony concerts,
heard from the twenty-five cent gallery of the old Symphony Hall, the
Christmas music at the Church of the Ascension, and the memorable
watch-night service, New Year’s Eve, at Trinity Church, when everyone
hoped and no one knew that Phillips Brooks would come. The church was
dim and fragrant with the odor of cedar and pine, and the people were
hushed by the beauty of the ancient ritual. As midnight approached the
great figure of the bishop appeared from among the trees of the choir
and mounted the pulpit. Bishop Brooks spoke simply and solemnly and
as the hour struck made a prayer out of his own deep heart. With his
message for the New Year we went into an unforgettable, marvellous
night, with snowy ground, a dark sky filled with fleecy clouds about a
prismed moon. In three weeks the beloved Bishop was dead--a true bishop
of all the people. The knowing of Phillips Brooks was one of the good
things my years in Wellesley brought me.

College days were over. I was a graduate of Wellesley, with all that
meant of training, of prestige, of obligation.

The four years had been busy and valuable, but they were not the
happiest days of my life, as school days are often said to be. I was
going through a period of re-adjustment and re-valuation that did not
make for peace of mind. I was often lonely, for, although I had a wide
and pleasant acquaintance, I did not make the intimate friends that I
did either before or after college days. I have wondered why. Was I so
unsettled that no one me dominated and attracted its own, or was I, the
western girl, always something of a stranger in a strange land? It may
have been better so, since I was to go so far from college haunts and
friends. The girls at the end sang pensively of Seniors about to be
“lost in the wide, wide world.” I didn’t care or fear. I hastened to be
lost, for the wide, wide world meant California, my homeland, to which
I fled the instant I secured my diploma. The western girl who went East
to college went West to live.

The years at Wellesley soon slipped back into the dim region of memory
and Los Angeles became once more the familiar environment of my life.
It was so good to be at home again--but Time was bringing changes and
new responsibilities. The family was smaller than it had been, for my
sister had followed me to Wellesley, and my aunt was taking a year-long
vacation in the East, thus giving me a chance to learn by experience
how to be a house-keeper. I judge that I, the amateur, did not always
reach the usual standard of good order set for our home, for I have a
picture of my father down on his knees at the parlor fireplace, one
evening before dinner when company was expected, carefully wiping the
blower with an oiled rag, while suggesting to me “I think if your Aunt
Marthy were here she would take those newspapers from the shelf under
the table.” I did not know that he noticed such things. I was a bit
conscience-smitten.

Our life went on serenely and happily. Daily he went down the hill to
the company office on First Street, just above Broadway. We filled our
home time with reading the newspapers, books and magazines especially
_The Forum_, which at that time was very good. I made a final
fruitless attempt to be musical, took a few painting lessons which I
wish had been many, and for a time went to the new Throop Institute in
Pasadena, for dressmaking training. I learned how to bone a basque and
line a skirt, and a few other arts now unnecessary.

On Sunday I undertook to hold the attention of half a dozen lively
small boys. We liked each other and had a very good time together, but
how much we learned I cannot say. Perhaps my own sons have profited by
my acquaintance with those other obstreperous young Americans. I never
wanted to exchange them for the neighboring class of little girls whose
whispers and giggles were less understandable to me than the excess of
energy evidenced by punching, pin-sticking, and the tipping over of
chairs.

Neither father nor I was very demonstrative, but we enjoyed being
together as we always had. We went out seldom in the evening as a
growing deafness made public meetings of little value to him. But we
never missed a Maine Society gathering. He had not lost his interest in
people from the old home state and read the _Great Register_ whenever
it came out, checking off every “Mainiac” and hunting him up when
possible.

One evening when a cousin, Frank Weston from Santa Clara, was visiting
us I heard him and father exchanging news of one and another relative
unknown to me, so I asked how many cousins there were; they did not
know; but father began naming them for me to count. He remembered one
hundred and twenty-five, no seconds being listed. How many first
he may have missed, I do not know. They all seemed to know him and
whenever a new one came to California he made for our house. There
was a certain quality about father that won people. I remember the
testimony to this that I witnessed about this time when he and I
had gone to a church supper together. He soon saw a strange, small
baby whom he borrowed and carried about with him all evening, to the
apparent satisfaction of both. It is a pity that his children came so
late in life that he had no chance to be grandfather to the fifteen
grandchildren that have accrued since his death.

The spring of 1896 brought a sudden dismay into our peaceful family.
A telegram from New York City reported the desperate illness of Nan,
who had gone there for her Easter vacation. Aunt Martha hurried to
her, while we at home for six weeks lived for the daily telegram.
The anxiety told on father, who was then past seventy. Even after my
sister’s safe return he still seemed weary.

That was the summer of the Free Silver campaign, and he was greatly
worried about the outcome and its effect upon his somewhat precarious
business affairs. Even his satisfaction at the defeat of Mr. Bryan was
offset by the strain of an all-night session counting ballots in a cold
polling place, he having been unable to resist the temptation to accept
his customary position as an election officer of his precinct. With
McKinley elected and Nan well the world was saved!

And then, early in December, one Saturday evening, he failed to answer
when called for dinner. I found him sitting at the old table that
had come with us from San Justo, his cards spread before him in his
accustomed solitaire, asleep, not to wake for us again,--a beautiful
way to go, no pain, no days of helplessness.

This meant the breaking up of the home, for we young folk scattered,
Nan to Wellesley to finish her interrupted course, Llewellyn to Pomona
College where he had been during the fall, and I to make a new home in
the East.

Since my marriage I have not lived actually in Los Angeles. For eight
years, divided between Michigan, Chicago, Honolulu and Cambridge,
Massachusetts, my home was outside of California; but even during that
time I made several visits here so that in all my life from the first
trip south from San Justo before I was a year old to the present, I
have never been away from Los Angeles for a period longer than two
years. Since my return to my own state, twenty-one years ago I have
always been within hailing distance. I have seen a city increase
and multiply in an amazing manner, even an hundred fold, a strange
experience for one who has no intention of being old for a long time
yet. Those who realize how this infant prodigy of a town is daily
swamped with hordes of new and unrelated people have patience with
some things for which she can be justly criticised; they take pride in
the vigor of her life and have faith that when she really grows up and
discovers a co-ordinated spirit to direct her overgrown body, she will
earn a right to her queenly name.

It is because these vanished days are so clear to me that I have put
down some of the things I know for those who care to read, among whom
I hope will be found the thirty grand-children of the Hathaway-Bixby
couples who have figured in the narrative.

The older people who have come into my record are all gone except Aunt
Margaret and Aunt Martha, both well beyond their three score years and
ten. They live in Long Beach, the new city on the old ranch barley
fields.

I began my book with a dedication to my father. I close it with a
loving greeting to my two aunts, the remaining “Hathaway girls;” the
one who welcomed me into the world and has been to me always the soul
of generosity and kindness, the other for more than forty years a
devoted mother to me, a woman of culture and character, whose alert
mind still follows the best thought of the day, and whose big heart
spends itself for the welfare of the oppressed.

My aunts, I salute you.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Illustrations have been moved to paragraph breaks near where they are
mentioned, except for the frontispiece.

Punctuation has been made consistent.

Variations in spelling and hyphenation were retained as they appear in
the original publication, except that obvious typographical errors have
been corrected.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADOBE DAYS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.